E. M. CIORAN | 


THE 
TROUBLE 
WITH 
BEING 
BORN 


TRANSLATED 
Richard Howard 


The Trouble with Being Born 


BY E. M. CIORAN 


Anathemas and Admirations 
Drawn and Quartered 
History and Utopia 
On the Heights of Despair 
A Short History of Decay 
Tears and Saints 
The Temptation to Exist 
The Trouble with Being Born 


E. M. Coran 


The Trouble 
with 
Being Born 


kd 


2 
P 
Translated from the French by 
RICHARD HOWARD 


ARCADE PUBLISHING 
New York 


Copyright © 1973 by Editions Gallimard 
English-language translation copyright © 1976 by Seaver Books 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any 
electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, 
without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer who may 
quote brief passages in a review. 


First published in France under the title De linconveniens d'dere nd 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publicarion Data 
Cioran, E. M. (Emile M.), 1911-1995 
(De l'inconvénient d'être ne. English] 
The trouble with being born / E.M. Cioran ; translated from the French by 
Richard Howard. 
p. cm. 
Originally published: New York : Viking Press, 1976 
ISBN 978-1-61145-044-6 
I. Title. 
PN6632.C5813 1998 
194—de21 98-21993 


Published in che United States by Arcade Publishing, Inc., New York, by arrangement 
with Seaver Books 
Distributed by Little, Brown and Company 


ccr 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Three in the moming. I realize this second, chen this one, then 
the next: I draw up the balance sheet for each minute. And why 
all this? Because I was born. It is a special type of sleeplessness 
that produces the indictment of birth. 


$ 


Ever since I was bom”—that since has a resonance so dreadful to 
my ears it becomes unendurable. 


§ 


There is a kind of knowledge that strips wharever you do of 
weight and scope: for such knowledge, everything is without 
basis except itself. Pure to the point of abhorring cven the notion 
of an object, it translates that extreme science according to which 
doing or not doing something comes down to the same thing 
and is accompanied by an cqually extreme satisfaction: that pf 
being able to rehearse, each time, the discovery that any gesture 
performed is not worth defending, that nothing is enhanced by 
the merest vestige of substance, that “reality” falls within che 
province of lunacy. Such knowledge deserves to be called 
posthumous: it functions as if the knower were alive and not 
alive, a being and the memory of a being. It's already in the 
past,” he says about all he achieves, even as he achieves it, 
thereby forever destitute of the present. 


C3] 


$ 


We do not rush toward death, we flee the catastrophe of birth, 
survivors struggling to forget it. Fear of death is merely the 
projection into the future of a fear which dates back to our first 
moment of life. 

We are reluctant, of course, to treat birth as a scourge: has it 
not been inculcated as the sovereign good—have we not been 
told that the worst came at the end, not at the outset of our 
lives? Yet evil, the real evil, is behind, not ahead of us. What 
escaped Jesus did not escape Buddha: “If three things did not 
exist in the world, O disciples, the Perfect One would not appear 
in the world. . . .” And ahead of old age and death he places 
the fact of birth, source of every infirmity, every disaster. 


$ 


We can endure any truth, however destructive, provided it 
replaces everything, provided it affords as much vitalicy as the 
hope for which ie substitutes. 


$ 


I do nothing, granted. But I see the hours pass—which is bettet 
than trying to fill them. 


5 


No need to elaborate workr—merely say something that can be 
murmured in the car of a drunkard or a dying man. 


§ 


Nothing is a better proof of how far humanity has regressed than 
the impossibility of finding a single nation, a single cribe, among 
whom birth still provokes mouming and lamentations. 


{4) 


§ 
To defy heredity is to defy billions of years, to defy the fins cell. 


§ 


There is a god at the outset, if not at the end, of every joy. 


$ 


Never comfortable in the immediace, I am lured only by what 
precedes me, what distances me from here, the numberless 
moments when I was not: the non-bom. 


$ 


Physical need of dishonor. How I should have liked to be the 
executioner’s son! 


$ 


What right have you to pray for me? I need no intercessor, I 
shall manage alone. The prayers of a wretch I might accept, but 
no one else's, not even a saint's. I cannot bear your bothering 
about my salvation. If I apprehend salvacion and flee it, your 
prayers are merely an indiscretion. Invest chem elsewhere; in any 
case, we do not serve the same gods. If mine are impotent, there 
is every reason to believe yours are no less so. Even assuming 
they are as you imagine them, they would still lack the power to 
cure me of a horror older than my memory. 


§ 


What misery a sensation is! Ecstasy itself, perbaps, is nothing 
more. 


[5] 


Unmaking, decreating, is the only task man may cake upon 
himself, if he aspires, as everything suggests, co distinguish 
himself from che Creator. 


$ 


I know that my birth is fortuitous, a laughable accident, and yet, 
as soon as I forget myself, I behave as if it were a capital event, 
indispensable to the progress and equilibrium of the world. 


$ 
To have committed every crime but that of being a facher. 


$ 
As a general rule, men expert disappointment: they know they 


must not be impacient, that it will come sooner or later, that it 
will hold off long enough for them m pmeeed with their 
underakings of the moment. The disabused man is different: for 
him, disappointment occurs at the same time as the deed; he has 
no need to await it, it is present By freeing himself from 
succession, he has devoured the possible and rendered che future 
superfluous. “I cannot meet you in your future.” he says to the 
others. “We do not have a single moment in common.” Because 
for him the whole of the future is already here. 

When we perceive the end in the beginning, we move faster 
than time. Illumination, that lightning disappointment, affords a 
certitude which wansforms disillusion into deliverance. 


§ 


I disentangle myself from appearances, yet I am snarled in them 
nonetheless; or rather: I am halfway between these appearances 
and thas which invalidates chem, thas which has neither name 


[6] 


nor content, that which is nothing and everything. I shall never 
take the decisive step outside them; my nature forces me to drift, 
to remain forever in the equivocal, and if I were co attempt a 
clean break in one direction or the other, I should perish by my 
salvation. 


$ 


My faculty for disappointment surpasses understanding. It is 
what lets me comprehend Buddha, but also what keeps me from 
following him. 


5 


What we can no longer commiserate with counts for nothing— 
no longer exists. We realize why our past so quickly stops being 
“ours” and cums into history, something which no longer 
concems anyone. 


§ 


In the deepest part of yourself, aspire to be as dispossessed, as 
lamentable as God. 


$ 


True contact between beings is established only by mute 
presence, by apparent non-communication, by that mysterious 
and wordless exchange which resembles inward prayer. 


§ 


What I know at sixty, I knew as well ar twenty. Forty years of a 
long, a superfluous, labor of veribarion. 


§ 


171 


I am for the most part so convinced that everything is lacking in 
basis, consequence, justification, that if someone dared to 
contradict me, even the man I most admire, he would seem to 
me a charlatan or a fool. 


§ 


Even in childhood I watched the hours flow, independent of any 
reference, any action, any event, the disjunction of time from 
what was not itself, its autonomous existence, its special status, 
its empire, its tyranny. I remember quite clearly that afternoon 
when, for the first time, confronting the empty universe, I was 
no more than a passage of moments reluctant to go on playing 
their proper parts. Time was coming unstuck from, being—at my 


expense. 
§ 
Unlike Job, I have not cursed the day I was born; all the other 


days, on the contrary, I have covered with my anathemas. . . . 


$ 


If dcath had only negative aspects, dying would be an 
unmanageable action. 


§ 


Everything exists; nothing exists. Eithet formula affords a like 
serenity. The man of anxiety, to his misfortune, remains between 
them, trembling and perplexed, forever at the mercy of a nuance, 
incapable of gaining a foothold in the security of being or in the 
absence of being. 


[8] 


Here on the coast of Normandy, at this hour of che moming, I 
needed no one. The very gulls’ presence bothered me: I drove 
them off with stones. And hearing their supernatural shrieks, I 
realized chat chat was just what I wanted, that only the Sinister 
could soothe me, and that it was for such a confrontation that I 
had got up before dawn. 


§ 
“In this our life — be in Lift: suddenly I am struck by the 


strangeness of such an expression, as if it applied to no one. 


$ 


Whenever I flag and feel sorry for my brain, I am carried away 
by an irresistible desire to prodam. That is the moment I realize 
the paltry depths out of which rise reformers, prophets, and 


saviors. 
§ 
I long to be fre—desperately free. Free as the stillborn are free. 


$ 


If there is so much discomfort and ambiguity in lucidity, it is 
because lucidity is the result of the poor use to which we have 
put our sleepless nights. 


§ 


Our obsession with birth, by shifting us to a point before our 
past, robs us of our pleasure in the future, in the present, and 
even in the past. 


Rare are the days when, projected into posi- history, I fall to 
witness the gods’ hilarity at leaving behind the human episode. 

What we need is an alternate vision, when that of the Last 
Judgment no longer satisfies anyone. 


$ 


An idea, a being, anything which becomes incamate loses 
identity, tums grotesque. Frustration of all achievement. Never 
quit che possible, wallow in eternal aifling, forge to be 
bom. 


$ 


The real, che unique misfortune: to see the light of day. A 
disaster which dates back to aggressiveness, to the seed of 
expansion and rage within origins, to the tendency to the worst 
which Ars shook them up. 


$ 


When we see somcone again after many years, we sbould sit 
down facing each other and say nothing for hours, so that by 


means of silence our constcmation can relish itself. 


$ 


Days of miraculous sıenlity. Instead of rejoicing over them, 
proclaiming victory, transforming this drought into a celebra- 
tion, sccing it as an illusuacion of my fulfillment, my maturity, 
in short my detachment, I let myself be invaded by spite and 
resentment: so tenacous is che old Adam in us, che bustling 
canaille, unfit for self · effacement. 


8 


{ 10 ] 


lam cnraptured by Hindu philosophy, whose cssential endeavor 
is to surmount the self; and everything I do, everything I think 
is only myself and the selfs humiliations. 


$ 

While we are performing an action, we have a goal; performed, 
the action has no more reality for us chan the goal we were 
seeking. Nothing of much consequence here—no more than a 
game. But some of us are conscious of this game in the course of 
the action: we experience the conclusion in che premises, the 
achieved in the virtual—we undermine “seriousness” by the very 
fact that we exist. 

The vision of non-reality, of universal default, is the product 
of an everyday sensation and a sudden frison. Everything is a 
game—without such a revelation, the sensation we haul through 
our usual lives would not have that characteristic stamp our 
metaphysical experiences cequire to be distinguished from their 
mitations, our discomforts. For every discomfort is only an 
abortive metaphysical experience. 


$ 


When we have wom out the interest we once took in death, 
when we realize we have nothing more to gain from it, we fall 
back on birth, we tum to a much more inexhaustible abyss. 


§ 


At this very moment, I am suffering—as we say in French, 7 ai 
mal. This event, crucial for me, is nonexistent, even inconceiva- 
ble for anyone else, for everyone else. Except for God, if that 
word can have a meaning. 


[ 2: ] 


We hear on all sides, chat if cvcrything is poindess, to do well 
whatever it is you’re doing is not. Yet it is, even so. To reach 
this conclusion, and to endure it, you need ply no trade, or at 
most, a king's—say, Solamon's. 


$ 


I react like everyone else, even like chose I most despise; but I 
make up for it by deploring every action I commit, good or bad. 
§ 


Where are my sensations? They have melted into . . me, and 
what is this me, this self, but the sum of these evaporated 
sensations? 


§ 


Extraordmary and null these two adjectives apply to the sexual 
act, and, consequently, to everything resuking from it, to life first 
of all. 

§ 


Lucidity is the only vice which makes us free—free im a desert. 
§ 


As the years pass, the number of those we can communicare with 
diminishes. When there is no longer anyone to talk to, at last we 
will be as we were hefore stooping to 2 name. 


§ 


Once we reject lyricism, to blacken a page becomes an ordeal: 
what's the use of writing in order to say exactly what we had to 
say? 


[ ra] 


§ 


We cannot consent to be judged by someone who has suffered 
less than ourselves. And since each of us regards himself as an 
unrecognized Job 


§ 


I dream of an ideal confessor to tell everything to, spill it all: I 
dream of a blasé saint. 


§ 


After all the ages of dying, the living must have leamed the 
trick; how else explain how the insect, the rodent, and man 
himself have managed, after a little fuss, to do it so properly? 


$ 


Paradise was unendurable, otherwise the first man would have 
adapted to it; this world is no less so, since here we regret 
paradise or anticipate another one. What to do? where to go? Do 
nothing and go nowhere, easy cnough. 


$ 


Health is cerminly a good thing; but those who possess it have 
been denied the opportunity of realizing it, for self-conscious 
health is either compromised or about to be Since no one 
delights in his absence of infirmities, we may speak without 
exaggrracion of a just punishment of the healthy. 


§ 


Some have misfortunes; others, obsessions. Which are worse off? 


§ 


[3] 


Don't be fair to me: I ean do without everything bur the tonic of 
injustice. 


$ 
“All is suffering”-—modernized, the Buddhist expression runs: 
“All is nightmare.” 
Thereby, nirvana, whose mission now is to end a much more 
widespread torment, is no longer a recourse reserved to the few 
but becomes as universal as nighunare itself. 


$ 


What is that one crucifixion compared to the daily kind any 
insomniac endures? 


$ 


I was walking late one night along a tree-lined path; a chestnut 
fell at my feet. The noise it made as it burst, the resonance it 
provoked in me, and an upheaval out of al) proportion to this 
insignificant event thrust me into miracle, into the rapture of the 
definitive, as if there were no more questions—only answers. I 
was drunk on a thousand unexpected discoveries, none of which 
I could make use of. 

This is how I nearly reached the Supreme. But instead I went 
on with my walk. 


§ N 
We tell our troubles to someone only to make him suffer, to 
make him assume them for himself. If we wanted to win him 


over, we would admic none but abstract worries, the only kind 
those who love us are eager to hear. 


§ 


[ 4 J 


I do not forgive myself for being born. It is as if, creeping into 
this world, I had profaned a mystery, betrayed some momentous 
pledge, commited a fault of nameless gravity. Vet in a less 
assured mood, birth seems a calamity I would be miserable not 
having known. ; 


§ 


Thought is never irmoant, for it is pitiless, it is aggressive, it 
helps us burst our bonds. Were we to suppress what is evil and 
even demonic in thought, we should have to renounce the very 
concept of deliverance. 


§ 


The surest way of not being deceived is to undermine one 
certainty after che next. Yet che fact remains that everything chat 
matters was accomplished outside doubt. 


$ 


For a long time—always, in fact—I have known that life here on 
earth is not what I needed and that I wasn't able co deal with it; 
for this reason and for this reason alone, I have acquired a souch 
of spiritual pride, so chat my existence seems to me the 
degradation and the erosion of a psalm. 


$ 


Our thoughts, in the pay of our panic, are oriented toward the 
future, follow the erail of all fear, open out onto death. And we 
invert their course, we send them backward when we direct them 
toward birth and force chem to linger upon it, Thereby they lose 
even that vigor, that unappeasable tension which underlies the 
horror of death and which is useful to our thoughts if they 


[15] 


would grow, develop, gather force. Hence we sec why, by taking 
a contrary trajectory, they lack spirit and are so weary, when at 
last they come up against their initial fronder, that they no 
longer have the energy to look beyond, toward the "'never-born.” 


$ 


It is not my beginnings, it is the beginning that matters to me. If 
I bump into my birth, into a minor obsession, it is because I 
cannot grapple with the first moment of time. Every individual 
discomfart leads back, ultimately, to a cosmogonic discomfort, 
each of our scnsations expiating that crime of the primordial 
sensation, by which Being crept out of somewhere. 


§ 


Though we may prefer ourselves to the universe, we nonetheless 
loadre ourselves much more than we suspect. If the wise man is 
so rare a phenomenon, it is because he seems anshaken by the 
aversion which, like all beings, he must feel for himself. 


$ 
No difference between being and non-being, if we apprehend 
them with the same intensity. 

$ 


Nescience is the basis of everything, it creates everything by an 
action repeated every moment, it produces this and any world, 
since it continually takes for real what in fact is not. Nescience is 
the tremendous mistake that serves as the basis of all our truths, 
it is older and more powerful than all the gods combined. 


$ 


[ :6 ] 


This is how we recognize the man who has tendencies coward an 
inner quese: he will set failure above any success, he will even 
scck it our, unconsciously of curse. This is because failure, 
always avsential, reveals us to ourselves, permits us to see 
ourselves as God sees us, whereas success distances us from what 
is most inward in oursclves and indeed in cycryching. 


§ 


There was a time when time did not yet exist. . . . The rejection 
of birth is nothing but the nostalgia for this time before time. 


§ 


I think of so many friends who are no more, and I pity them. Yet 
they are not so much to be pitied, for they have solved every 
problem, beginning with the problem of death. 


$ 


In the fact of being bom there is such an absence of necessity 
that when you think about ie a little more chan usual, you are 
left—ignorant how to react—with a foolish grin. 


§ 


Two kinds of mind: daylight and nocrumal. They have neither 
the same method nor the same morality. In broad daylight, you 
watch yourself, in the dark, you speak out. The salutary or 
awkward consequences of what he thinks matter little to the man 
who questions himself at hours when others are the prey of 
sleep. Hence he meditates upon the bad luck of being bom 
without concern for the harm he can cause others or himself. 
After midnight begins the intoxication of pemicious truths. 


$ 


[ 17] 


As the years accumulare, we form an increasingly somber image 
of the furure. Is this only to console ourselves for being excluded 
from it? Yes in appearance, no in fact, for the future has always 
been hideous, man being able co remedy his evils only by 
aggravating them, so that in each epoch existence is much more 
tolerable before che solution is found to che difficulties of the 
moment. 


$ 
In major perplexities, try to live as if history were done with and 
to ceact like a monster riddled by serenity. 

$ 


If I used to ask myself, over a coffin: “What good did it do the 
occupant to be bom?”, I now put the same question about 


anyone alive. 


$ 


The emphasis on birth is no more- than the craving for the 
insoluble carried to the point of insanity. 


$ 


Regarding death, I ceaselessly waver between mystery and 
“inconsequentiality”—between the Pyramids and the Morgue. 
í 


$ 


It is impossible to feel that there was a time when we did not 
exist. Hence our attachment to the personage we were before 
being born. 


{ 18] 


“Meditate but onc hour upon the selfs nonexistence and you 
will feel yourself to be another man,” said a priest of the 
Japanese Kusha sect to a Western visitor: 

Without having frequented the Buddhist monasteries, how 
many times have I not lingered over the world’s unreality, and 
hence my own? I have not become another man for that, no, but 
there certainly has remained with me the feeling that my identity 
is entirely illusory, and that by losing it I have lost nothing, 
except something, except everything. 

§ 
Instead of clinging to the fact of being born, as good sense bids, I 
take che risk, I tum back, I retrogress increasingly toward some 
unknown beginning, I move from origin co origin. Some day, 


perhaps, I shall manage to reach origin itself, in order to rest 
there, or be wrecked. 


$ 


X insults me. I am about to hit him. Thinking it over, I refrain. 

Who am I? which is my real self: the self of the retort or that 
of the refraining? My first reaction is always energetic; the 
second one, flabby. What is known as “wisdom” is ulsimately 
only a perpetual “thinking it over,” ie., non-action as first 
impulse. 


§ 


If attachment is an evil, we mus: look for its cause in the scandal 
of birth, for to be bom is to be attached. Detachment then 
should apply itself to getting cid of the traces of this scandal, che 
most serious and intolerable of all. 


$ 


{ 9) 


Amid anxiety and distress, sudden calm at the thought of the 
foetus one has been. 


§ 


At this precise moment, no reproach proceeding from men or 
gods can affect me: I have as good a conscience as if I had never 
existed. 


$ 


It is a mistake to believe in a direct relation berween suffering 
reverses and being dead set against birth. Such opposition has 
deeper, more distant roots, and would occur even if one had only 
the shadow of a grievance against existence. In fact it is never 
more virulente chan in cases of extreme good fortune. 


$ 


Thracians and Bogomils—I cannot forget that I have haunted 
the same whereabouts as they, nor that the former wept over the 
newborn and the latter, in order to justify God, held Satan 
responsible for the infamy of Creation. 


§ 


During the long nights in the caves, how many Hamlets must 
have murmured their endless monologues—for it is likely that 
the apogee of metaphysical torment is to be located well before 
that universal insipidicy which followed the advent of Philoso- 
phy. 

§ 


The obsession with birth proceeds from an exacerbation of 
memory, from an omnipresence of the past, as well as from a 


[ 20] 


craving for the impasse, for the first impasse. —No openness, 
hence no joy from the past but solely from the present, and from 
a future emaropated from time. 

$ 


For years, in fact for life, co have meditated only on your last 
moments, only to discover, when at last you approach chem, that 
it was Of no use, that the thought of death helps in everything 
save in dying! 


$ 


It is our discomforts which provoke, which create consciousness; 
their task accomplished, they weaken and disappear one after the 
other. Consciousness however remains and survives them, 
without recalling what it owes to them, without even ever 
having known. Hence it continually proclaims its autonomy, its 
sovereignty, even when it loathes itself and would do away with 
itself. 


$ 


According to the Rule of Saint Benedict, if a monk became 
proud of or merely satisfied with the task he was performing, he 
was to forsake it then and there. 

One danger not dreaded by the man who has lived in the 
thirst for unsatisfaction, in an orgy of cemorse and disgust. 


$ 


If it is true that God dislikes taking sides, I should feel no 
awkwardness in His presence, so pleased would I be to imitaw 
Him, to be like Him, in everything, “without opinion.” 

$ 


La) 


To get up in the moming, wash and then wait for some 
unforeseen variety of dread or depression. 
I would give the whole universe and all of Shakespeare for a 
grain of ataraxy. 
$ 
Nierzsche’s great luck—to have ended as he did: in euphoria! 


$ 


Endessly to refer to a world where nothing yet stooped to 
occurrence, where you anticipated consciousness without desiring 
it, where, wallowing in the virtual, you rejoiced in che null 
plenitude of a self anterior to selfhood. . 

Not to bave been born, merely musing on shite Seat happiness, 
what freedom, what space! 


[ 22 ] 


den 


If disgust for che world conferred sanctity of itself, I fail to see 
how I could avoid canonization. 


$ 


No one has lived so close to his skeleton as I have lived co mine: 
from which results an endless dialogue and certain truths which 
I manage neither to accept nor to reject. 


$ 


It is easier to get on with vices than with vircues. The vices, 
accommodating by nature, help each other, are full of mutual 
indulgence, whereas the jealous virues combat and annihilace 
each other, showing in everything their incompatibility and their 
intolerance. 


§ 


It is trifling to believe in what you do or in what others do. You 
should avoid simulacra and even “realities”; you should take up a 
position external to everything and everyone, drive off or grind 
down your appetites, live, according to a Hindu adage, with as 
few desires as a “solitary elephant.” 


$ 
I forgive X everything because of his obsolete smile. 


{ 25 } 


$ 


He who hates himself is not humble, 


$ 
In certain men, everything, absolutely everything, derives from 
physiology: their body is their mind, their mind is their body. 
§ 


Time, fertile in resources, more invencive and more charitable 
than we think, possesses a remarkable capacity to help us out, to 
afford us at any hour of the day some new humiliation. 


§ 


I have always sought out landscapes that preceded God. Whence 
my weakness for Chaos. 


§ 


I have decided not to oppose anyone ever again, since I have 
noticed that I always end by resembling my latest enemy. 


§ 


For a long while I have lived with the notion that I was the most 
normal being that ever existed. This notion gave me the taste, 
even the passion for being unproductive: what was the use of 
being prized in a world inhabited by madmen, a world mired in 
mania and stupidity? For whom was one to bother, and to what 
end? It remains to be seen if I have quite freed myself from this 
certitude, salvacion in the absolute, ruin in the immediate. 


§ 


[ 26] 


Violent men are generally sickly, “broken-down.” They live in 
perpetual combustion, at the expense of their bodies, exactly like 
ascetics, who in the discipline of quierude erode and exhaust 
themselves, quite as much as the furious. 


$ 


Write books only if you are going to say in them the things you 
would never dare confide to anyone. 


§ 


When Mara, the Tempter, tries to supplane the Buddha, the 
latter says, among other things: “By what right do you claim to 
rule over men and over the universe? Have you suffered for 
knowledge?” 

This is the crucial, perhaps the sole question we should ask 
ourselves when we scrutinize anything, especially a chinker. 
There is mever too great a distinction made between those who 
have paid for the tiniest step toward knowledge and those, 
incomparably more numerous, who have received a convenient, 


indifferent knowledge, a knowledge without ordeals. 


$ 


We say: he has no talent, only tone. But cone is precisely what 
cannot be invented—we're bom with it. Tone is an inberited 
grace, the privilege some of us have of making our organic 
pulsations felt tone is more than talent, it is ¡es exsence. 


$ 


The same feeling of not belonging, of futility, wherever I go: I 
pretend interest in what maners nothing to me, I bestir myself 


[ 27 ] 


mechanically or out of charity, without ever being caught up, 
without ever being somewhere. What attracts me is elsewhere, 
and I don't know what that elsewhere is. 


$ 


The farther men get from God, the farther they advance into the 
knowledge of religions. 


§ 


“For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your 
eyes shal] be opened. 

No sooner are they open than the drama begins. To look 
without underitandmg—that is paradise. Hell, then, would be the 
place where we understand, where we understand too 
much. 


$ 


I get along quite well with someone only when he is at his 
lowest point and has neither the desire nor the strength to 
restore his habitual illusions. 


$ 
Pitilessly judging our contemporaries, we have every likelihood 
of figuring, in the eyes of posterity, as penetrating minds. At one 
stroke we renounce the risky aspect of admiration, the marvelous 
perils it supposes. For admiration is a risk, the most unforesce- 
able of all because it may happen to tum out well. 


$ 


Ideas come as you walk, Nietzsche said. Walking dissipates 
thoughts, Shankara taught. 


{ 28 ] 


Both theses are cqually well-founded, hence equally true, as 
each of us can discover for himself in the space of an hour, 
sometimes of a minute. 


§ 


No variety of literary originality is still possible unless we 
torture, unless we pulverize language. It proceeds differently if 
we abide by the expression of the idea as such. Here we find 
ourselves in an area where requirements have not altered since 
the pre-Socratics. 


§ 


If only we could reach back before the concept, could write on a 
level wich che senses, record the infinitesimal variations of what 
we touch, do what a reptile would do if it were to set about 
writing! 


§ 


Anything good we can have comes from our indolence, from our 
incapability of caking action, executing our projects and plans. It 
is the impossibility or the refusal of self-realization which 
sustains our “virtues,” and it is che will to do our utmost chat 
carries us to excesses, to disorders. 


$ 


That “glorious delirium” Saint Teresa of Avila speaks of, 
invoking one of the phases of her union with God, is what a 
desiccated mind, necessarily jealous, will never forgive the 
mystics. 


[29] 


Not onc moment when I have not been conscious of being 
outside Paradise. 


§ 


Only what you hide is profound, is true. Whence the power of 
base feelings. 


$ 


Ama naani, says the Imitation of Christ. Love to be unknown. We 
are happy with ourselves and wich the world only when we 
conform to this prompt 


$ 
The inwinsic value of a book does not depend on the importance 
of its subject (else the theologians wouid prevail, and mightily), 
but on the manner of approaching che accidental and the 
insignificant, of mastering the infinitesimal. The eseria! has 
never required the least talent. 


$ 


The feeling of being ten thousand ycars behind, or ahead, of the 
others, of belonging to the beginnings or to the end of 
humanity... 

$ 
Negation never proceeds from reasoning but from something 
much more obscure and old. Argumen come afterward, to 
justify and sustain it. Every so rises out of the blood. 


{ 30 } 


With che help of the erosion of memory, to call the first 
initiatives of matter and the risk of life which followed from 
them... 


§ 
Each ame I fail to chink about death, I have che impression of 


cheating, of deceiving someone in me. 


§ 


There are nights that che mos: ingenious torturers could not 
have invented. We emerge from them in pieces, stupid, dazed, 
with neither memories nor anticipations, and without even 
knowing who we are. And it is then that the day seems useless, 
light pernicious, even more oppressive than the darkness. 


$ 


A conscious fruit fly would have to confront exactly the same 
difficulties, the same kind of insoluble problems as man. 


§ 


Better to be an animal than a man, an insect than an animal, a 
plant than an insect, and so on. 

Salvation? Whatever diminishes che kingdom of conscious- 
ness and compromises its supremacy. 


§ 


I have all che defects of other people and yet everything they do 
seems to me inconceivable. 


[ 31] 


Considcring things according to nature, man was madc to live 
facing outward. If he would see into himself, he must close his 
eyes, renounce his endeavors, quit the immediate. What is called 
“inner life” is a belated phenomenon, possible only by a slowing 
down of our vital activities, “the soul” being able to emerge and 
claborate itself only at the capense of the guud behavior of our 
organs. 


§ 


The merest atmospheric variation jeopardizes my plans, not to 
speak of my convictions. This kind of deperdency—the most 
humiliating kind—unfailingly lays me low, even as it dissipates 
what few illusions remain as to my possibilities of being free and 
as to freedom itself. What is the use of swaggering if you are at 
the mercy of Wet and Dry? One craves a less lamentable 
bondage, and guds of anuther kidney. 


$ 


It’s not worth the bother of killing yourself, since you always kill 
yourself too late. 


§ 


When you know quite absolutely that everything is unreal, you 
chen cannot see why you should take the trouble to prove ic. 


§ 


As it leaves dawn behind and advances into the day, light 
prostitutes itself and is redeemed—ethics of twilight—only at the 
moment it vanishes. 


L 32 } 


In Buddhist writings, mention is often made of the abyss of 
birth.” An abyss indeed, a gulf into which we do not fall but 
from which, instead, we emerge, to our universal chagrin. 


$ 
At increasingly wider intervals, impulses of gratitude roward Job 
and Chamforr—coward vociferation and vitriol . . . 


$ 
Each opinion, each view is necessarily partial, truncarcd, 
inadequate. In philosophy and in an thing. originalicy comes 
down to incomplete definitions. 


$ 


If we consider closely our so-called generous actions, there is 
none which, from some aspect, is not blameworthy and even 
harmful, so that we come to regret having performed it—so that 
we must choose, finally, baween abstention and remorse. 


$ 


Explosive force of any mortification. Every vanquished desire 
affords us power. We have the more hold over this world the 
further we withdraw from it, the less we adhere to it. 
Renunciation confers an infinite power. 


$ 


My disappointments, instead of converging toward a center and 
constituting if not a system at least an ensemble, are scartered, 
each supposing itself unique and thereby wasted, lacking 
organizacion. 


{ 33 ] 


The only successful philosophies and religions are the ones that 
flatter us, whether in the name of progress or of hell. Damned or 
not, man experiences an absolute need to be at the heart of 
everything. Ie is, in fact, solely for chis reason that he is man, 
chat he has bevme man. And if some day he no longer feels this 
need, he must give way to some other animal prouder, madder 
than himself. 


§ 
He detested objective truths, the burden of argument, sustainad 
reasoning. He disliked demonstrating, he wanted to convince no 
one. Otbers are a dialectician’s invention. 


$ 
The more injured you are by time, the more you seek to escape 
it. To write a faultless page, or only a sentence, raises you above 
becoming and its corruptions. You transcend death by the 
pursuit of the indesauctible in speech, in the very symbol of 
nullity. 

$ 


At the climax of a failure, at the moment when shame is about 
to do us in, suddenly we are swept away by a frenzy of pride 
which lasts only long enough to drain us, to leave us without 
energy, to lower, with our powers, the intensity of our shame. 


§ 


If death is as horrible as is claimed, how is it chat after the 
passage of a certain period of time we consider sappy any being, 
friend or enemy, who has ceased to live? 


$ 


{ 34 } 


More than once, I have managed to leave my room, for if I had 
stayed there I could not be sure of being able to resist some 
sudden resolution. The strect is more assuring, you think less 
about yourself there, there cverything wealens and wilt, 
beginning with your own confusion. 


$ 


Characteristic of sickness to stay awake when cverything sleeps, 
when cverything is at rest, even the sick man. 


$ 


When we are young, we take a certain pleasure in our infirmities. 
They seem so new, so rich! With age, they no longer surprise us, 
we know them too well. Now, without anything unexpected in 
them, they do not deserve to be endured, 


$ 


Once we appeal to our most intimate selves, once we begin to 
labor and co produce, we lay claim co gifts, we become uncon- 
scious of our own gaps. No one is in a position to admit that what 
comes out of his own depths might be worthless. "Self-knowl- 
edge”? A contradiction in terms. 


$ 
All these poems where it is merely the Poem that is in 
question—a whole poetry with no other substance than itself! 
What would we say of a prayer whose object was religion? 

$ 


The mind that puts cverything in question reaches, after a 
thousand incerrogations, an almost total inertia, a situation which 


[35 ] 


the inen, in fact, knows from the start, by instinct. For what is 
inercia but a congenital perplexity? 


$ 


What a disappoinument thar Epicurus, the sage I most need, 
sbould have written over three hundred treatises! And what a 
relief that they are lost! 


$ 
What do you do from moming to night?” 
“I endure myself.” 
$ 


A remark of my brother’s apropos of the troubles and pains our 
mother endured: “Old age is nature’s self-criticism.” 


§ 


“One must be mad or drunk,” the Abbé Sieyès said, to speak 
well in che known languages. One must be drunk or mad, 1 
should add, to dare, still, to use words, any word. 


$ 


The fanatic of elliptical gloom is sure to excel in any career save 
that of being a writer. 


$ 


Having always lived in fear of being surprised by the worst, I 
have tried in every drcumseance to get a head start, flinging 
myself into misfortune long before it occurred. 


$ 


[ 36] 


We do not envy those who have the capacity to pray, whereas 
we are filled with envy of the possessors of goods, of those who 
know wealth and fame. Strange that we resign ourselves to 
someone's salvation and not to what fugitive advantages he may 
enjoy. 

§ 


I never met one intersting mind that was not richly endowed 
with inadmissible deficiencies. 


$ 


No true art without a strong dose of banality. The con- 
stant employment of the unaccustomed ceadily wearies us, 
nothing being more unendurable than the uniformity of the 
exceptional. 


§ 


The trouble with using a borrowed language is that you have no 
right to make too many mistakes in it. Now, it is by seeking a 
certain incorrecmess without however abusing it, it is by 
continually approaching solecism, that writing may be given the 
appearance of life. 


$ 


Each of us believes, quite unconsciously of course, that he alone 
pursues the truth, which the rest are incapable of seeking out and 
unworthy of attaining. This madness is so deep-rooted and so 
useful that it is impossible to realize what would become of each 
of us if it were someday to disappear. 


§ 


{ 37 ] 


The first thinker was, without a doubt, che first man obsessed by 
toby. An unaccustomed mania, not at all contagious: rare indeed 
are those who suffer from it, who are a prey to questioning, and 
who can accept no given because they were bom in consternation. 


§ 


To be objective is to treat others as you treat an object, a 
corpse—to behave with them like an undertaker. 


§ 


This very second has vanished forever, lost in the anonymous 
mass of the irrevocable. It will never return. I suffer from this, 
and I do not. Everything is unique—and insignificant. 


$ 


Emily Bronce: everything that comes from her has the capacity to 
overwhelm me. Haworth is my Mecca. 


$ 


To walk along a stream, to pass, to flow with the water, without 
effort, without haste, while death continues in us its ruminations, 
its unincerrupted soliloquy . . . 


§ 


Only God has the privilege of abandoning us. Men can only 
drop us. 


$ 


Without the faculty of forgetting, our past would weigh so 
heavily on our present that we should nor have the strength to 


[ 38 ] 


confront another moment, still less to live through it. Life would 
be bearable only to frivolous natures, those in fact who do not 
remember. 


$ 


Plotinus, Porphyry cells us, had the gift of reading men's souls. 
One day, without any warning, he told his astounded disciple not 
to try killing himself but rather to take a joumey. Porphyry lefe 
for Sicily: there he was cured of his melancholy but, he adds 
regretfully, he thereby missed being present at his master’s death, 
which occurred during his absence. 

It has been a long time since philosophers have read men's 
souls. It is not their task, we are told. Perhaps. But we must not 
be surprised if they no longer matter much to us. 


A work exists only if ic is elaborated in the darkness with 
attention, with all che care of the murderer plotting his crime. In 
both cases, what counts is the will to serike. 


$ 


Self-knowledge—the bieterest knowledge of all and also the kind 
we cultivate least: what is the use of catching ourselves out, 
moming to night, in che act of illusion, pitilessly racing each act 
back to its root, and losing case after case before our own 
tribunal? 


$ 


Bach time I have a lapse of memory, I think of che anguish 
which must afflict those who Anow they no longer remember 


{ 39 ) 


anything. Buc something tells me chat after a certain time a 
secret joy possexses them, a joy they would not agree to trade for 
any of their memories, even the most stirring. . . . 


§ 


To claim you are morc detached, more alien to everything than 
anyone, and co be merely a fanatic of indifference! 


$ 
The more you are a victim of contradictory im pulses, the less you 
know which to yield to. To lack chorarter—preasely that and 
nothing but. 

$ 


Pure time, time decanted, freed of events, beings, and things, 
appears only at cermin moments of the night, when you feel it 
coming on, with the one intention of sweeping you off toward an 
exemplary catastrophe. 


{ 40) 


Suddenly feeling that you know as much as God about anything 
rm quire as suddenly sceing this sensarion 


vanish . 


$ 
Firschand thinkers meditate upon things; the others upon 
problems. We must live face to face with being, and not with the 
mind. 

$ 
“What are you waiting for in order to give up?” —Each sickness 
sends us a summons disguised as a question. We play deaf, even 
as we realize chat the game is played out and that next time we 
must have the courage, at last, to capitulate. 


$ 
The older I grow, the less I react to frenzy, delirium. My taser, 
among thinkers, now goes only to extinct volcanoes. 

$ 


As a young man, I bored myself to death, bur I belicved in 
myself. If I had no suspicion of che dreary creature I was to 
become, I knew nonetheless that, whatever happened, Perplexity 


{ 43] 


would not desert me, chat it would keep watch over my years 
with all the zeal and exacticude of Providence. 


$ 


If we could see ourselves as others sec us, we would vanish on 
the spot. 


$ 


I once remarked to an Italian friend that the Latin peoples are 
without verre too open, too garrulous—and that I preferred 
nations ravaged by timidity, adding that a writer who hus failed 
to know it in his life is worthless in his writings. “You're right,” 
he answered. “When we describe our experiences in our books, 
there is a lack of intensity, and of extension, for we have already 
told them a hundred times before.” Whereupon we talked about 
the literature of femininity, of its absence of mystery in counties 
where the salon and the confessional prevail. 


§ 


We should never deprive ourselves, I forget who once remarked, 
of the “pleasures of piety.” Has religion ever been justified more 
delicately? 


$ 


This craving to revise our enthusiasms, to change idols, to pray 
sewbm . . 


§ 


To stretch out in a field, to smell the earth and tell yourself it is 
the end as well as the hope of our degctions, chat it would be 


{ 44 } 


futile to serch for anything bener to rest on, to dissolve 
into. 


§ 


When I happen to be busy, I never give a moment's thought to 
the “meaning” of anything, particularly of whatever it is I am 
doing. A proof that the secret of everything is in action and not 
in abstention, that facal cause of consciousness. 


$ 


What will be the physiognomy of painting, of poetry, of music, 
in a hundred years? No one can tell. As after the fall of Athens, 
of Rome, a long pause will intervene, caused by the exhaustion 
of the means of expression, as well as by the exhaustion of 
consciousness itself. Humanity, to rejoin the past, must invent a 
second naiveté, without which the arts can never begin again. 


§ 


In one of the chapels of this ideally ugly church, we find the 
Virgin standing with her Son above the globe: an aggressive sect 
which has undermined and conquered an empire and inherited 
its flaws, beginning with gigantism. 
§ 
It is written in the Zohar: “When man appeared, thereupon 
appeared the flowers.” I suspect they were there long before him, 
and chat his advent plunged them all into a stupefaction from 
which they have not yet recovered. 


$ 


[4] 


Impossible to read a line by Kleist withouc chinking thar he 
committed suicide: as if his suiade had preceded his works. 


$ 


In the Orient, the oddest, the most idiosyncratic Western 
thinkers would never have been taken seriously, on account of 
their contradictions. This is precisely why we are interested in 
them. We prefer not a mind but the reversals, the biography of a 
mind, the incompatibilities and aberrations to be found there, in 
short those thinkers who, unable to œnform to the rest of 
humanity and still less to themselves, cheat as much by whim as 
by fatality. Their distinctive sign? A touch of fakery in the tragic, 
a hint of dalliance even in the irremediable. 


$ 


If, in her Foundations, Teresa of Avila lingers over the subject of 
melancholia, it is because she recognizes it as incurable. 
Physicians, she says, cannot deal wich it, and the mother superior 
of a convent, faced with such sufferers, has but one carse: to 
inspire them with the dread of authority, to threaten them, to 
frighten them. The saint’s method remains the best: only kicks, 
slaps, and a good beating will be effective in the case of a 
“depressive.” Moreover, such treatment is precisely what the 
“depressive” himself resorts co when he decides to end it all: he 
merely employs more thorough means. 


§ 
In relation to any act of life, the mind acts as a killjoy. 


§ 


[6] 


Easy co imagine the elements, bored with dicir cahausted theme, 
disgusted by their invariable and utterly predictable combina- 
tions, seeking some diversion: life would be merely a digression, 
merely an anecdor. . . . 


§ 


Anything that can be done seems to me pemicious and at best 
futile. If need be I can rouse myself but not act. I understand all 
too well Wordsworth’s description of Coleridge: eternal activity 
without action. 


$ 


Whenever something still seems possible, I have the sense 1 
have been bewitched. 


$ 


The one sincere confession is the one we make indirectly—when 
we talk about other people. 


$ 


We do not adopt a belief because it is true (they are all true), but 
because some obscure power impels us to do so. When this 
power leaves us, we suffer prostration and collapse, a céte-a-tére 
with what is left of ourselves. 


§ 


“The quality of every perfect form is to release the mind 
immediately, whereas the corrupt form holds che mind prisoner, 
like a bad mirror which tells us of nothing but itself.” In Kleist’s 
praise—and how un-German it sounds—of limpidity, his carget 


{ 47] 


was not philosophy in particular. Yet his is the bese possible 
critique of philosophical jargon, 2 pseudo-language which, 
attempting to reflect ideas, merely assumes a contour at their 
expense, merely denatures and darkens chem, merely calls 
attention to itself. By one of the most troublesome of all 
usurpations, che word has taken the leading role in a realm 
where it should be imperceptible. 


§ 


“O Satan, my Master, I give myself unto thee forever!” How I 
regret not remembering the name of che nun who, having 
written these words with a mail dipped in her own blood, 
deserves to figure in an anthology of prayer and concision. 


§ 


Consciousness is much more than the thom, it is the dagger in 
the flesh. 


$ 


Ferocity occurs in all conditions save in joy. Schadenfreude, 
malicious joy, is a missepresentation. To do evil is a pleasure, not 
a joy. Joy, the one true victory over the world, is pure in its 
essence, hence irreducible to pleasure, which is always suspect, 
both in itself and in its manifestations. 


$ 
An existence constantly transfigured by failure. 
$ 
The wise man consents to everything, for he identifies himself 


with nothing. An opportunist without desires. a 


1 48 ] 


§ 


Nature’s great mistake was to have been unable to confine 
herself to one “kingdom”: juxtaposed with the vegetable, 
everything else seems inopportune, out of place. The sun should 
have sulked at the appearance of the first insect, and gone out 
altogether wich the advent of the chimpanzee. 


$ 


If, as we grow older, we scrutinize our own past at the expense of 
“problems,” it is simply because we handle memories more 
readily than ideas. 


$ 


The last whose disloyalty we forgive are those we have 
disappointed. 


§ 


What other people do we always fecl we could do berer. 
Unfortunately we do not have the same feeling about what we 
ourselves do. 


$ 
“I was the Prophet,” Mohammed informs us, “when Adam was 
still berween the water and the clay.” . . . When we have not 


had the pride to found a religion—or at least to destroy 
one—how do we dare show ourselves in the light of day? 


§ 


Detachment cannot be learned: it is inscribed in a civilization. 
We do not tend toward it, we discover it in ourselves. I was 


[ 49 ] 


thinking this when I read that a missionary, after eighteen years 
in Japan, had made only sixty converts, and old ones at that. 
Moreover they escaped him at the last moment, dying in 
Japanese fashion, without remorse, without torments, worthy 
descendants of their ancestors who, to inure themselves, in che 
days of the Mongol wars, let themselves be impregnated by the 
nothingness of all things and by their own nothingness. 


$ 


We can meditate upon eternity only in a prone position. For a 
considerable period, eternity was the Orientals’ principal con- 
cern: did they not prefer che horizonta) position? Once we lie 
down, time ceases to pass, to count. History is the product of a 
race thar stands. As a vertical animal, man was to get into the 
habit of looking ahead, not only in space but in time as well. To 
which wretched origins we may trace the Future! 


$ 


Every misanthrope, however sincere, at times reminds me of that 
old poet, bedridden and utterly forgocren, who in a rage with his 
contemporaries declared he would receive none of chem. His 
wife, out of charity, would ring at the door from time to 
time. 


§ 


A work is finished when we can no longer improve it, though we 
know it to be inadequate and incomplete. We are so overtaxed 
by it that we no longer have the power to add a single comma, 
however indispensable. What determines the degree to which a 
work is done is not a requirement of art or of truth, it is 
exhaustion and, even more, disgust. A 


{ 5 ] 


§ 


Whereas any sentence one has to write requires a pretense of 
invention, it takes little enough attention to enter into a text, 
even a difficult one. To scribble a postcard comes closer to 


creative activity than to read The Phenomenology of Mind. 


§ 


Buddhism calls anger “corruption of the mind,” manicheism 
“root of the cree of death.” 1 know this, but what good does it do 
me to know? 


§ 


She meant absolutely nothing to me. Realizing, suddenly, after 
so many years, that whatever happens I shall never see her again, 
I nearly collapsed. We understand what death is only by 
suddenly remembering the face of someone who has been a 
matter of indifference to us. 


$ 


As art sinks into paralysis, artists multiply. This anomaly ceases 
to be one if we realize chat art, on its way to exhaustion, has 
become boch impossible and easy. 


$ 


No one is résponsible for what he is nor even for what he does. 
This is obvious and everyone more or less agrees that it is so. 
Then why celebrate or denigrate? Because to exist is to evaluate, 
to emit judgments, and because abstention, when it is not the 
effect of apathy or cowardice, requires an effort no one manages 
to make. 


{ 51) 


$ 
Every farm of haste, even toward che good, betrays some mental 
disorder. 


$ 


The least impure thoughts are those which appear between our 
anxieties, in the intervals of our annoyance, in those deluxe 
moments our misery grants itself. 


§ 


Imaginary pains are by far che most real we suffer, since we feel a 
constant need for them and invent them because there is no way 
of doing without them. 


§ 


If it is characteristic of the wise man to do nothing useless, no 
one will surpass me in wisdom: I do not even lower myself to 
useful things. 


* 4 


§ 

Impossible to imagine a degraded animal, a sub- animal. 
$ 

O to have been bom before man! 
§ 


Try as I will, I cannot manage to scom all chose centuries during 
which men busied themselves with nothing more than perfect- 
ing a definition of God. 


{ 52 ] 


The most effective way to avoid dejection, motivated or 
gratuitous, is to take a dictionary, preferably of a language you 
scarcely know, and to look up word after word in it, making sure 
chat they are che kind you will never use. 


$ 


As long as you live on this side of the terrible, you will find 
words to express it; once you know it from inside, you will no 
onger find a single one. 


§ 


There is no limit-disappointment. 


$ 


Grievances of every kind pass, but their source abides, and 
nothing has any effect on it: unassailable and unvarying, it is our 
fatum. 


$ 


To realize, in rage and desolation alike, that nature, as Bos- 
suet says, will not long grant us “this morsel of matter she 
knds."—Tha mone of matter: by dint of pondering it we 
reach peace, though a peace it would be better never to have 
known. 


$ 


Paradox is not suited to burials, nor to weddings or births, in 
fact. Sinister—or grotesque—cvents require commonplaces; the 
terrible, like the painful, accommodates only the cliché. 


$ 


{ 53) 


However disabused one may be, it is impossible to live without 
any hope at all. We always keep one, unwittingly, and this 
unconscious hope makes up for all the explicit others we have 
rejected, exhausted. 


$ 


The more laden he is with years, the more ceadily he speaks of 
his death as a distant, quite unlikely event. Life is now such a 
habit that he has become unfit for death. 


$ 


A blind man, authentically blind for or.ce, held out his hand: in 
his posture, his rigidity, there was something chat caught you, 
that made you hold your breath. He was handing you his 
blindness. 


$ 


We forgive only madmen and children for being frank with us: 
others, if they have che audacity to imitate them, will regret it 
sooner or later. 


$ 


To be “happy” you must constantly bear in mind the miseries 
you have escaped. This would be a way for memory to redeem 
itself, since ordinarily it preserves only disasters, eager—and with 
what success!—to sabotage happiness. 


§ 


Afver a sleepless night, the people in the street seem automatons. 
No one seems to breathe, to walk. Each looks as if he is worked 
by clockwork: nothing spontaneous; mechanical smiles, spectral 


{ 34 ] 


gesticulations. Yourself a specter, how would you see others as 
alive? 
$ 


To be sterile—with so many sensations! Perpetual pocay 
without words. 


$ 


Pure fatigue—fatigue without cause, the kind that comes like a 
gift or a scourge: chat is what helps me pull myself together, that 
is what affords me knowledge of my “self.” Once it leaves me, I 
am no more than an inanimate object. 


§ 


Anything in folklore that remains alive comes from before 
Christianity. —The same is true of whatever is alive in each of 
us. 


§ 
A man who fears ridicule will never go far, for good or ill: he 
remains on this side of his talents, and even if he has genius, he 
is doomed to mediocrity. 


§ 


“Amid your most intense activities, pause a moment to ‘consider’ 
your mind”—this advice is surely not offered to those who 
“consider” their minds night and day, and who thereby have no 
need to suspend their activities, for the good reason that they 
engage in none. 


[ss] 


Only what has been conceived in solitude, face to face with God, 
endures— whether one is a believer or not. 


§ 


A passion for music is in itself an wow). We know more about 
a stranger who yields himself up to it than about someone who 
is deaf to music and whom we see every day. 


$ 


No meditacion without a tendency to repctitiveness. 


$ 


As long as God had him in tow, man advanced slowly, so slowly 
he did not even realize it. Now that he no longer lives in 
anyone’s shadow, he is in a rush, and deplores it—he would give 
anything to regain the ald cadence. 


$ 
We have lost, being born, as much as we shall lose, dying. 
Everything. 

§ 


Satiefy—I have just now uttered this word, and already I no 
longer know apropos of what, so readily does it apply to 
everything I feel and think, to everything I love and loathe, to 
satiety itself. 


§ 


I have killed no onc, I have done better: I have killed the 
Possible, and like Macbeth, what I need most is to pray, but like 
him too, I cannot say Amen. 


[ 36 } 


(Y 
£ 


To deliver blows none of which land, to atuck everyone without 
anyone’s noticing, to shoot arrows whose poison you alone 
receive! 


§ 


X, whom I have always treated as badly as I could, does not 
resent me because he resents no one. He forgives every insult, he 
even forgets them. How I envy him! To be like him, I should 
have to live chrough several existences and exhaust all my 
possibilities of cansmigration. 
$ 

In the days when I set off on month-long bicycle trips across 
France, my greatest pleasure was to stop in country cemeteries, to 
stretch out between two graves, and to smoke for hours on end. I 
think of those days as the most active period of my life. 


$ 


How can you control yourself, master your behavior, when you 
come from a country where people howl at funcrals? 


$ 


On certain mornings, no sooner have I stepped out the door than 
I hear voices calling my name. Am I really me? Is it really my 


{ 59 ] 


name? It is, it fills all space, it is on the lips of every passerby. 
Each pronounces it, even that woman in the next telephone 
booth, at the post office. 

Sleepless nights devour the last vestiges of our common sense, 
our modesty, and would rob us of our reason, if the fear of 
ridicule didn’t come to save us. 


$ 


My curiosity and my repulsion, as well as my terror under his 
oily, meullic gaze, his obsequiousness, his unvamished cunning, 
his strangely unveiled hypocrisy, his continual and obvious 
dissimuktions, that mixture of scoundrel and madman .. . His 
insincerity is evident in cach gesture, in every word. Insincerity 
isn't the right word, for to be insincere is to conceal the truth, 
and to know the truth, but in him there is no trace, no notion, 
no atom of truth, nor of lying eicher, nothing but a loathesome 
covetousness, a calculating lunacy. . . . 


§ 


Around midnight, a woman in cears comes up to me in the 
street: "They’ve knifed my husband, France is disgusting, luckily 
l'm from Brittany, they took away my children, they kept me on 
drugs for six months.. Not having realized at first that she 
was mad, so real her agony seemed (and in a sense was), 1 let her 
chatter on for a good half hour: talking did her good. Then I 
abandoned her, celling myself thae the difference between us 
would be infinitesimal if I hegan to pour out my recriminations 
to the first comer. 


[ 60 ] 


A professor in an Eastern European counuy cells me that his 
mother, a peasant woman, was astonished to find out he was 
suffering from insomnia. When sleep didn't come, all she had to 
do was imagine a huge wheatfield swaying in che wind and she 
fell asleep at once. 

With the image of a city, one would not arrive at the same 
resulte. It is inexplicable and miraculous that any city-dweller ever 
manages to close an eye. 


§ 


The little cavern is frequented by che old men who live in the 
home at the end of the village. They come here, sitting with a 
glass in one hand, searing at cach other without a word. One of 
them begins telling something he thinks is funny. No one 
listens, in any case no one laughs. All of them have drudged for 
years to get here. In che old days, in the countryside, someone 
would have smothered chem under a pillow. A wise recipe, 
perfected by each family, and insomparably more humane than 
this one: gathering them together, sitting them here and curing 
them of boredom by stupor. 


§ 
According to the Bible, it is Cain who created the first city, in 
order to have, as Bossuet puts it, a place wherin to elude bis 
remorse. What a udgment! And how many times have I not felt 
is accuracy.in my night walks through Paris! 

$ 


One night, climbing the stairs in the dark, I was halted by an 
invincible force rising from boch within and without. Unable to 


{ 6: ] 


take another step, I stood there nailed to the spot, petrified. 
DAPOSSIBLITY—this ordinary word came, more apropos than 
usual, co enlighten me as to myself, no less than as to che word 
as well: it had so often come to my aid, yet never as now. At Jast 
I understood, definitively, what it meant. 


§ 


An ancient cleaning woman, in answer to my “How's everything 
going?” answers without looking up: “Taking its course.” This 
ultra- banal answer nearly brings me to tears. 

The more such cums of speech, which deal with becoming, 
with che passage of time, with the une of things, are worn 
down, the more likely they are to acquire the quality of a 
revelation. But che cruch is nor that they create an exceptional 
state, ory that you yourself were in that state without realizing 
it, and that it required only a sign or a pretext for the 
extraordinary to occur. 


§ 


We lived in the country, I went to school, and—an important 
detail—I slept in my parents’ room. At night it was my father’s 
habit to read aloud to my mother. Though he was 1 Greek 
Orthodox priest, he would read anything, doubtless assuming 
that at my age I wouldn't understand. Usually I didn’t even listen 
and fell asleep, unless the text was some gripping stary. One 
night I pricked up my ears. He was reading the scene from a 
biography of Rasputin where the father, on his deathbed, calls 
his son to him and says: "Go to Saine Petersburg and make 
yourself master of the city, fear nothing and no one, for God is an 
old hog.” 


Such an enormity in my father’s mouth, for whom the 


[ 62 ] 


priesthood was not a jole, impressed me as much as a 
conflagracion or in earthquake. But I also distinctly reaath—this 


was over fifty years ago—that my emotion was followed by a 
strange, dare I say a perverse pleasure. 


$ 


Having penetrated, in the course of years, quite deeply into two 
or three religions, I have always retreated on che threshold of 
“conversion,” lest I lie co myself. None of them was, in my eyes, 
free enough to admit that vengeance is a need, the most intense 
and profound of all, and that each man must satisfy it, if only in 
words. If we stifle that need, we expose ourselves to serious 
disturbances. More than one disorder—perhaps all disorders—de- 
rive from a vengeance too long postponed. We must leam how 
to explode! Any disease is bealibier than the one provoked by a 
hoarded rage. 


$ 


Philosophy in the Morgue. “My nephew was obviously a fallure. 
[f he had succeeded in making something of himself he would 
have had a different ending chan . . . this.” "You know, 
Madame,” I replied to the monumental matron who had 
addressed me, “whether one succeeds or not comes down to the 
same thing.” “You're right,” she said, after a few seconds’ 
thought. This unexpected acquiescence on the part of such a 
woman moved me almost as much as the death of my friend. 


$ 


Misfits . . . It seems to me that their adventure, more than any 
other, sheds a ght on the future, that they alone allow us to 


[6 } 


glimpse and to decipher it, and chat if we set their exploi:s aside 
we utterly disqualify ourselves from decnbing the days to come. 


§ 


"A pity,” you were saying, “that N has never produced 
anything.” 

“So what! He exists. If he had given birth to books, if he had 
had the misfortune to ‘realize’ himself, we wouldn’t have been 
talking abouc him the last hour.” The advantage of being 
someone is rarer than that of creating. To produce is casy; what 
is difficult is to scom the use of one's gifts. 


$ 


Filming a scene, there are countless takes of the same incident. 
Someone watching in the street—obviously a provincial—can’t 
get over it: “After this, I'll never go to the movies again.” ` 

One might react similarly with regard to anything whose 
underside one has seen, whose secret one has scized. Yet, by an 
obnubilarion which has something of the miraculous about it, 
there are gynecologists who are attracted to their patients, 
gravediggers who father children, incurables who lay plans, 
skeptics who write. 


$ 


T, a rabbi’s son, complains chat this age of unprecedented 
persecutions has seen the birth of no original prayer capable of 
being adopred by the community and uttered in the synagogues. 
I assure him that he is mistaken to be cistressed or alanned by 
the fact: che great disasters yicld nothing on the lierary or 
religious level. Only the semi-misfortunes are fruitful, because 


[ 64 } 


they can be, because they are a point of departure, whereas too 
perfect a hell is almost as sterile as paradise. 


$ 


I was twenry. Everything was a harden. One day I collapsed on a 
couch with an “I can’t cake it any longer.“ My mother, already 
driven distracted by my sleepless nights, told me she had just had 
a mass said for my rest. Not one but thirty thowand, 1 would 
have liked to shout at her, thinking of the figure Charles V 
inscribed in his will—for a much longer rest, true enough. 
è § 

I can across him again, quite by chance, after twenty-five years. 
Unchanged, intact, fresher chan ever, he actually seems to have 
recreated coward adolescence. 

Where has he been hiding, and what has he done to escape 
the action of the years, to avoid our wrinkles and grimaces? And 
how has he lived, if in fact he has lived at all? Actually, a ghost. 
He must have cheated, he has not pecformed his duty as a living 
man, not played the game. A ghost, yes, and a gate<rasher. I 
discem no sign of destruction on his countenance, none of those 
marks which testify that one is 2 real being, an individual and 
not an apparition, What can I say to him? I feel awkward, 
embarrassed, even afraid. So greatly are we upset hy anyone who 
escapes time, or merely deceives it. 


' § 
D.C, who was writing his recollections of childhood in his 


Rumanian village, having told his neighbor, a peasant named 
Coman, that he wouldn’t be left out, received a visit from che 


[ ós] 


larter early the next day: “I know Pm a worthless man but all 
the same I didn’t think I had fallen so low as to be talked about 
in a book.” 

How superior the oral world was to ours! Beings (I should 
say, peoples) live in the truth only as long as they have a horror 
of che written. Once they catch che virus, they enter the 
inauthentic, they Jose their old superstitions to acquire a new 
one, worse than all che others combined. 


§ 
Incapab:e of gerting up, nailed to my bed, I drift with the whims 
of my memory, and I see myself wandering, as a child, in the 
Carpathians. One day I stumbled on a dog whose master, 
doubtless to be rid of it, had ced it to a tree; the animal was liete 
more than a skeleton, so drained of life that it barely had the 
strength to look at me, without being able to move. Yet it was 
standing, that dog. 

$ 
A stranger comes and tells me he has killed someane. He is not 
wanted by the police because no one suspects him. I am the only 
one who knows he is the killer. What am I to do? I lack che 
courage as well as the ceachery (for be has encrusted me wich a 
scart—and what a secret!) co turn him in I feel I am his 
accomplice, and resign myself w being arrested and punished as 
such. At the same time, I tell myself this would be too 
ridiculous. Perhaps I shall go and denounce him all the same. 
And so on, until I wake up. 

The interminable is the specialty of the indecisive. They 
cannot mark life out for their own, and still less their dreams, in 
which they perpetuate their besitarions, pusillanimities, scruples. 
They are ideally qualified for nighunare. 


[ 66 ] 


$ 


A film about wild animals: endless cruelty in every latitude. 
“Nature,” a torturer of genius, steeped in herself and her work, 
exults with good reason: there is not a moment when what is 
alive fails to memble, to make others memble. Pity is a strange 
luxury only the most perfidious and the fiercest creature could 
invent, out of a need to punish and torture itse]f—out of ferocity, 


$ 


On a poster which, at a church door, announces The Art of the 
Fugue, someone has scrawled in huge letters: Ged is dead. This 
apropos of the composer who testifies chat God, in the event of 
his decease, can revive præciscly while we are listening to certain 
anans, certain fugues! 


$ 


We have spent 2 little over an hour together. He has used the 
time to show off, and by dint of trying to say interesting things 
about himself, bas succeeded. If he had merely swaggered in 
moderation, I should have found him a bore and left in a few 
minutes. By exaggerating, by playing the peacock to perfection, 
he has come close enough to wit to show some. The desire to 
appear subtle docs not destroy subtlety. A mental defective, if he 
could feel the longing to astonish, would manage to deceive 
us—would even catch up with intelligence. 


5 


X, who is older than che patriarchs, after inveighing, during a 
long céte-a-tere, against this one and chat, cells me: “The great 


[ 67 ] 


weakness of my life is chat I’ve never hated anyone.” Our hatred 
does not diminish with the years: in fact, it mounts. That of an 
old man like X attains incredible proportions: row insensitive to 
his former affections, he puts all his faculties at che service of his 
rancors which, miraculously reinvigorated, will survive the 
crumbling of his memory and even of his reason. 

. . . The danger of frequenting the old is that when we find 
them so far from detachment and so incapable of espousing it, 
we arrogate to ourselves all che advantages they are supposed to 
have and do not. And it is inevitable that our real or imaginary 
advance upon them in matters of weariness or disgust should 
incite to presumption. 


§ 


Every family has its own philosophy. One of my cousins, who 
died young, once wrote me: “It’s all the way it’s always been arid 
probably always will be until there's nothing left any more.” 

Whereas my mother ended the last note she ever sent me 
with this testamentary sentence: “Whatever people try to do, 
they'll regret it sooner or later.” 

Nor can I even boast of having acquired this vice of regret by 
my own setbacks, It precedes me, it participates in che parimony 
of my tribe. What a legacy, such unfimess for illusion! 


§ 


A few kilometers from the village where I was born, there was a 
hamlet, perched on a hill and inhabited solely by gypsies. In 
1910 an amateur ethnologist visited the place, accompanied by a 
photograpber. Hc managed to collect the inhabitants, who 
agreed to let their picture be taken, without knowing what chat 
meant. At the instant they were asked to hold still, an old 
woman shrieked: "Waech our, they're stealing our souls!” 


[ 68 ] 


Whereupon they all flung themselves upon the two visitors, who 
had the greatest difficulty making their escape. 

These half-savage gypsies—what were they but India, their 
land of origin which, under these circumstances, was speaking 
through them? 

§ 
In continual rebellion against my ancestry, I have spent my 
whole life wanting co be something else: Spanish, Russian, 
cannibal—anything, except What I was. It is an aberration to 
want to be different from what you are, to espouse in theory any 
and every condition, except your own. 


$ 


The day I read the list of- nearly all che Sanskrit words that 
designate che absolute, I realized chat I had taken che wrong 
pach, the wrong country, the wrong idiom. 


$ 


A friend, after I don’t know how many years of silence, writes 
that she hasn’t much longer to live, and that she is preparing to 
“enter the Unknown. . . . The cliché gives me a start. I find it 
hard to sec wha! one might enter by death. Any affirmation, in 
this realm, seems co me a delusion. Death is not a state, perhaps 
not even a transition, Then what is it? And by what cliche, in my 
cum, will I answer my friend? 


$ 


I may change my opinion on the same subject, he same event, 
ten, twenty, thiny times in the course of a single day. And to 
think that each time, like che worst impostor, 1 dare utter che 
word truch“ 


{ 69 ] 


$ 


Hale and hearty still, che woman dragged her husband after her, 
a tall, hunched man, eyes staring; she dragged him as if he had 
been the survivor of another age, an apoplectic and suppliant 
diplodocus. 

An hour later, a second encounter: a neatly dressed old 
woman, rely stooped, “advanced” toward me; her body 
forming a perfect half. circle, she necessarily kept her eyes on the 
ground, doubrless counting her unimaginable slow tiny foot- 
steps. It was as if she were learning how to walk, as if she were 
afraid of not knowing how and where to place her feet in order 
to move. 

. . . Everything is good which brings me closer to Buddha. 


$ x 


Despite her white hair, she still paraded up and down her part of 
the sidewalk, looking for customers. I would run into her often, 
at three in the moming, and never felt like going home until I 
had heard her tell a few anecdots or exploits. I have forgoren 
anecdotes and exploits alike, but not che readiness with which, 
one night when I had begun storming against all the sleeping 
“vermin” of Paris, she broke in with her forefinger pointing to 
heaven and: What about the vermin up there?” 


$ 


"Everything is without basis, without substance,” and I never 
repeat it co myself without feeling something like happiness. 
Unfortunately there are so many moments when 1 fail to repeat 
it to myself. 


[ 70 ] 


de a 
€ 


I read him for the shipwrecked feeling I get from anything he 
writes. At first you follow, chen you start going in circles, then 
you are caught up in a kind of mild unmenacing whirlpool, and 
you tell yourself you're sinking, and then you do sink But you 
don't really drown—that would be too easy! You come back up 
to the surface, you follow all over again, amazed to see he seems 
to be saying something and co understand what it is, and then 
you stast going round and round again, and you sink once more. 
. . . All of which is meant to be profound, and seems so. But 
once you come to your senses you realize it’s only abstruse, 
obscure, and chat the distance between real profundity and che 
willed kind is as great as berween a revelation and a whim. 


$ 


Anyone who gives himself up to writing believes—without 
realizing the fact that his work will survive the years, the ages, 
time itself. . If he felt, while he was at work on it, chat it was 
perishable, he would leave off where he was, he could never 
finish. Activity and credulity are correlative terms. 


$ 


“Laughter ceased, and after laughter smiles.” This apparently 
naive remark by a biographer of Alexsandr Blok defines to 
perfection the program of any and every downfall. 


[73] 


$ 


No easy matter, to spcak of God when one is neither a believer 
nor an atheist: and it is undoubudly the drama we all share, 
theologians included—no longer capable of being either one or 
the other. 


§ 


For a writer, progress ward detachyocnt and deliverance is an 
unprecedented disaster. He, more chan anyone else, needs his 
defects: if be wiumphs over them, he is lost. He must be careful, 
then, not to improve, for if he succeeds, he will regret it bitterly. 


$ 


We must beware of whatever insights we have into ourselves. 
Our self-knowledge annoys and paralyzes our daimon—this is 
where we should Jook for the reason Socrates wrote nothing. 


$ 
What makes bad poets worse is that they read only poets (just as 
bad philosophers read only philosophers), whereas they would 
benefit much more from a book of botany or geology. We are 
enriched only by frequenting disciplines remote from our own. 
This is true, of course, only for realras where the ego is rampant. 


§ 


Tertullian cells us that in order to be cured, epileptics would go 
“and greedily suck the blood of criminals slaughtered in the 
arena.” If I were to heed my instinct, this would be the one type 
of medication, no matter what che disease, which I would adopt. 


§ 


{ 74 ) 


What cight have we to be annoyed by someone who calls us a 
monster? The monster is unique by definition, and solicude, even 
the solicude of infamy, supposes something positive, a peculiar 
election, but undeniably an election. 


$ 


Two enemies—the same man divided. 


$ 


“Never judge a man without putting yourself in his place.” This 
old proverb makes all judgment impossible, for we judge 
someone only because, in fact, we cannot put ourselves in his 
place. 


$ 


If you love your independence, you must lend yourself, in order 
tO protect it, to every turpitude; you must risk ignominy itself. 


$ 


Nothing more abominable than the critic and, a fortiori, the 
philosopher in each of us: if I were a poet, I should behave like 
Dylan Thomas, who, when people would discuss his poems in 
his presence, would drop to the floor in a fit of convulsions. 


$ 


Anyone who bestirs himself commits one injustice after che next, 
without a trace of remorse. Just bad humor. —Remorse is for 
those who do nothing, who cannot act. It replaces action for 
them, consoles them for their ineffectuality. 


$ 


[ 75) 


Most of our troubles come from our first impulses. The slightest 
enchusiasm costs more than a crime. 


$ N 
Since we remember clearly only our ordeals, it is ultimately the 
sick, the persecuted, the victims in every realm who will have 


lived to the best advantage. The others—the lucky ones—have a 
life, of course, but not the memory of a life. 


$ 


What a bore, someone who doesn’t deign to make an 
impression. Vain people are almost always annoying, but they 
make an effort, they take the trouble: they are bores who don't 
want to be bores, and we are gratcful to them for chat: we end by 
enduring them, even by seeking them out. On the other hand, 
we cum livid with fury in the presence of someone who pays no 
attention whatever to the effect he makes. What are we to say to 
him, and what are we to expect from him? Either keep some 
vestiges of the monkey, or else stay home. 


§ 


Not the fear of effort but the fear of success explains more than 
one failuce. 


§ 


I'd like to pray with dagger-words. Unfortunately, if you pray at 
all, you have to pray like everyone else. Wherein abides one of 
the greatest difficulties of faith. 


$ 


[ 76] 


We dread the future only when we are not sure we can kill 
ourselves when we want to. 


$ 


Neither Bossuer, nor Malcbranchc, nor Renclon deigned to 
mention the Pensé: apparently Pasca) didn't strike chem as 
sufficiently serios. 


$ 
fear is the antidote to boredom: the remedy must be stronger 
shan the disease. 

§ 


If only I could reach che level of the man I would have liked to 
be! But some power, increasing year by year, draws me down. 
Even to get back up to my surface, I have to employ stratagems I 
cannot think of without blushing. 

$ 


There was a time when, in order to dispel any impulse of 
vengeance once | had endured some affront, I would imagine 
myself quite saill in my grave. And I calmed down at once. We 
must not despise our corpse too much: t can be useful on 
occasion, 


$ 
Every thought derives from a thwarted sensation. 


$ : 


The only way to reach another person at any depth is to move 


{ 77] 


toward what is deepest in yourself. In other words, to take the 
opposite path from the one followed by so-called generous 
minds. 

$ 


If only I could say with that Hasidic rabbi: “The blessing of my 
life is chat I have never needed a thing before I possessed it!” 


§ 


In permitting man, Nature has commited much more than a 
mistake in her calculations: a crime against herself. 


$ 


Fear creates aomutncua—not natural fear but morbid fear. 
Otherwise animals would have achieved a level of consciousness 
higher than ours. 


§ 


As orangutang in the strict sense of the word, man is old; as 
bistorical orangutang, he is comparatively recent: a parvenu who 
has not had time to leam how to behave in life. 


$ 


After cerain experiences, we should change names, since we 
ourselves are no longer the same. Everything assumes another 
aspect, starting with death. Which seems close and desirable: we 
are reconciled to it, and we reach che point of calling it “man’s 
best friend,” as Mozart does in a letter to his dying father. 


$ 


o 


{ 78 } 


We must suffer to the end, to the moment when we stop 
believing in suffering. 
$ 


“Truth remains hidden co the man filled with desire and hatred” 
(Buddha). . . . Which is to say, to every man aliw. 


$ 


Won over by solitude, yet he remains in the world: a stylice 
without a pillar. 


$ 


“You were wrong to count on me.” Who can speak in such 
terms? God and the Failure. 


§ 


Everything we achieve, everything that comes out of us, aspires 
to forget its origins, and succeeds only by opposing us. Hence 


the negative sign chat marks all our successes. 


$ 


There is nothing to say about anything. So there can be no limit 
to the number of books. 


$ 


Failure, even repeated, always seems fresh; whereas success, 
multiplied, loses all interest, all artraction. It is not misfortune 
bac happiness—insolent happiness, it is tru. uch leads to 
rancor and sarcasm. 


[79 ] 


“An enemy is as useful as a Buddha.” Exactly, for our enemy 
watches over us, keeps us from letting ourselves go. By 
indicating, by divulging our least weakness, he leads us straight 
to our salvation, moves heaven and earth to keep us from being 
unworthy of his image of us. Hence our gratitude to him should 
be boundless. 


§ 


We get a better hold of ourselves and of being when we have 
reacted against negating, dissolving books—against their noxious 
power. Fortifying books, actually, since they provoke the very 
energy which denies them. The more poison they contain, the 
more sahırary their cfleut, provided we read them against che 
grain, as we should read any book, starting with the cate- 
chism. 


$ 


The greatest favor we can do an authur is to forbid him co work 
during a certain period. Short-term tyrannies are necessary —pro- 
hibitions which would suspend all intellectual activity. Unsnter- 
rupted freedom of expression exposes talent to a deadly danger, 
forces it beyond its means and keeps it from stockpiling 
sensadons and experiences. Unlimited freedom is a crime against 
the mind. 


§ 


Self-pity is not so sterile as we suppose. Once we feel its mere 
onset, we assume a thinker’s atticude, and come to think of it, we 
come to think! 


[ 80 } 


The stoic’s maxim, according to which we should submit 
uncomplainingly to things which do not depend on ourselves, 
takes into account only external misforrunes, which escape our 
will. But how to accommodate ourselves to those which come 
from ourselves? If we are the source of our ills, whom are we to 
confront? Ourselves? We manage, luckily, to forget that we are 
the guilty parties, and moreover existence is tolerable only if we 
daily renew this lie, this act of oblivion. 


$ 


All my life, I have lived with che feeling chat I have been kept 
from my crue place. If the expression “metaphysical exile” had 
no meaning, my existence alone would afford it one. 


§ 
The more gifted a man is, the less progress he makes on the 
spiritual level. Talent is an obstacle to the inner life. 

§ 
To save che word “grandeur” from officialdom, we should use it 
only apropos of insomnia or heresy. 

$ 
In classical India, the sage and the saint were combined in one 
ind the same person. To have any notion of such a success, we 
must imagine, if we can, a fusion between resignation and 
ecstasy, between a cold stoic and a disheveled mystic. 

$ 
Being is suspect. Then what is to be said of “life,” which is its 
deviation and stigma? 


[ 8: ] 


$ 


When somcone tells us of an unfavorable opinion about 
ourselves, instead of being distressed, we should think of all the 
“evil” we have spoken of others, and realize that it is only justice 
that as much should be said of ourselves. Ironically, no one is 
more vulnerable, more susceptible, and less likely to acknowl- 
edge his own defects than the backbiter. Merely tell him about 
the slightest reservation someone has made in his regard, and he 
will lose countenance, lose his temper, and drown in his own 
bile. 


$ 


Seen from the outside, harmony reigns in every sect, clan, and 
party; seen from the inside, discord. Condicts in a monaaery are 
as frequent and as envenomed as in any society. Even when they 
desert hell, men do so only to reconstruct it elsewhere. 


$ 


The kas conversion is cxpcricnecd as an advance. Fortunately 
there exist exceptions. 

One of my favorites is chat eightcenth-century Jewish sect in 
which men went over to Christianity in order to debase 
themselves; and another is that South American Indian who, 
upon conversion, lamented that he must now become chc prey of 
worms instead of being caten by his children, an honor he would 
have enjoyed had he not abjured his tribe's beliefs. 


$ 


Only normal that man should no longer be interested in religion 
but in religions, for only through them will he be in a position 
to understand the many versions of his spiricual collapse. 


{ 62 } 


$ 


When we recapitulate che stages of our career, it is humiliating 
to realize that we have not had the disasters we deserved, the 
ones we were entitled to expect. 


§ 


In some men, the prospect of a more or less imminent end 
excites energy, good or bad, and plunges them into a frenzy of 
activity. Artless cnuugh co try to perpetuate themselves by theis 
endeavor, by their work, they move heaven and earth to finish, to 
conclude it: not a moment to lose. 

The same perspective invites others to founder in what's-the- 
use, in a stagnant clear-sighredness, in the unimpeachable truths 
of despond. 


§ 


"My curse on the man who, in future editions of my works, 
cnowingly changes anything—a sentence, or only a word, a 
syllable, a letter, a punctuation mark!” Is it the philosopher or 
the writer in Schopenhauer who speaks this way? Both at once, 
and this conjunction (when we think of che awful style of any 
philosophical work) is extremely rare. It is not a Hegel who 
would have ucered such a curse. Nor any other major 
philosopher, except Plato. 


$ 


Nothing more aggravating than a seamless, unsemitting irony 
which leaves yon no time to breathe and still less to think; 
which instead of being inconspicuous, occasional, is massive, 
automatic, at the antipodes of its essentially delicate nature. 


{ 83 } 


Which in any case is how it is used in Germany, a nation which, 
having medicated upon it the most, is least capable of wielding 
it. 


§ 


Anxiety is not provoked: it tries to find a justification for itself, 
and in order to do so seizes upon anything, the vilest pretexts, to 
which it clings once it has invented them. A reality which 
precedes its particular expressions, its varieties, anxiety provokes 
itself, engenders itself, it is “infinite creation,” and as such is 
more likely to suggest the workings of the divinicy than those of 
the psyche. 


¿$ 


Automatic melancholy: an elegiac robot. 


$ 


At a grave, the words: game, imposture, joke, dream, come to 
mind. Impossible to think that cxistenc is a serious phenome- 
non. Cerainty of faking from the star, at bottom. Over the gate 
of our cemeteries should be written: “Nothing Is Tragic. 
Everything Is Unreal.” 


$ 


I shall not soon forget the expression of horror on what was his 
face, the dread, the extreme suffering, and the aggression No, he 


was not happy. Never have I seen a man so uncomfortable in his 
coffin. 


{ 84 } 


Look neither ahead nor behind, look into yourself, with neither 
fear nor regret. No one descends into himself so long as he 
ronains a slave of che past or of the future. 


$ 


Inelegant to reproach a man for his steriliey, when that is his 
postulate, his mode of achievement, his dream. . 


§ 


Nights when we have slept arc as if they had never been. The 
only ones that semain in our memory are che ones when we 
couldn't close our eyes: night means sleepless night. 


§ 


In order not to have co resolve them, I have cumed all my 
practical difficulties into theoretical ones. Faced with the 
Insoluble, I breathe at last. 


§ 


To 2 student who wanted to know where I stood with regard to 
the author of Zarathustra, 1 replied chat I had long since stopped 
reading him. Why? “I find him too nnr. 

I hold his enthusiasms, his fervors against him. He demol- 
ished so many idols only to replace them with others: a false 
iconoclast, with adolescent aspects and a certain virginity, a 
certain innocence inherent in his solitary’s carcer. He observed 
men only from a distance. Had he come closer, he could have 
neither conceived nor promulgated the superman, that preposter- 
ous, laughable, even grotesque chimera, a crutchet which could 
occur only to a mind without time to age, to know the long 
serene disgust of detachment. 


[85 ] 


Marcus Aurelius is much closer to me. Not a moment’s 
hesitation berwern che lyricism of frenzy and the prose of 
aepunce: I find more comfort, more hope even, in the weary 
emperor than in the thundering prophet. 


[ 86 ] 


Appealing, that Hindu notion of entrusting our salvation to 
someone else, to a chosen “saint,” and permitting him to pray in 
our place, to do anything in order to save us. Selling our soul to 


$ 


“Does talent have any need of passions? Yes, of many 
passions—repressed” (Joubert). Not one moralist we cannot 
convert into a precursor of Preud. 


$ 


It is always surprising to discover that the great mystics produced 
so much, that they left so many treatises. Undoubtedly their 
intencion was to celebrate God and nothing else. This is true in 
part, but only in part. 

We do not create a body of work without attaching ourselves 
to it, without subjugating ourselves to it. Writing is che least 
ascetic of all actions. 


$ 


When I lie awake far into the night, I am visited by my evil 
genius, as Brucus was by his before the battle of Philippi 


§ 


[ 89 ] 


“Do 1 look like someone who has something to do bere on 
earth?” —That’s what I'd like to answer the busybodies who 
inquire into my activities. 


It has been said that a metaphor “must be able to be drawn.” 
Whatever is original and lasting in literature for at least a 
century contradicts this remark. For if anything has outlived its 
usefulness it is “coherent” metaphor, one with explicit concours. 
It is against such metaphor that poetry has unceasingly rebelled, 
to the point where a dead poetry is a poetry affiaad wich 
coherence. 


$ 


Listening to the weather report, I feel a strong response to the 
words “scastered rain.” Which œrainly proves that poetry is in 
ourselves and not in che expression, though scastered is an 
adjective capable of setting up a certain vibration. 


$ 


Once I formulate a doubt, or more exacuy, once I feel the need 
to formulate a doubt, I experience a curious, disturbing 
well-being. It would be far easier for me to live without a trace of 
belief chan without a trace of doubt Devasting doubt, nour- 
ishing doubt! 


There is no false sensation. 


[ 9 ] 


Withdraw into yourself, perceive there a silence as old as being, 
even older. 


§ 


If I detest man, I could not say with the same ease: I detest the 
human being, for in spite of everything there is something more, 
something enigmatic and engaging in that word being which 
suggests qualities alien to che idea of man. 


$ 


In the Dhammapada, it is suggested that, in order to achieve 
deliverance, we must be rid of the double yoke of Good and Evil. 
That Good itself should be one of our feners we are too 
spiritually retarded to be able to admit. And so we shall not be 
delivered. 


§ 
Everything cums on pain; the rest is accessory, even nonexistent, 
for we remember only what hurts. Painful sensations being the 
only real ones, it is virtually useless to experience otbers. 

§ 


I believe wich chat madman Calvin chat we are predestined to 
salvacion or damnation in our mother’s womb. We have already 
lived our life before being born. 


$ 


A free man is one who has discerned the inanity of all points of 
view; 2 liberated man is one who has drawn the consequences of 
such discemment. 


[ 91 } 


No sanctity without an inclination to scandal. This is true not 
only of saints; whocver manifests himself, in any way at all, 
proves he possesses a more or less developed taste for 
Provocation. 


§ 
I feel I am free but I drow I am not. 


$ . 


I suppressed word after word from my vocabulary. When the 
massacre was over, only one had escaped: Solitude. I awakened 
euphoric. 


$ 


If I have been able to hold out till now, it is because each blow, 
which seemed intolerable ar the cime, was followed by a second 
which was worse, then a third, and so on. If I were in hell, I'd 
want its circles to multiply, in order to count on a new ordeal, 
more trying than its predecessor. A salutary policy, with regard 
to torments at least. 


$ 


What music appeals to in us it is difficult eo know; what we do 
know is that music reaches a zone so deep that madness itself 
cannot penetrate there. 


$ 


We should have been excused from lugging a body: the burden 
of the self was enough. 


{ 92 ] 


To recover a taste for certain things, to make my “soul” over, a 
nap of several cosmic epochs would be welcome. 


$ 


I never could understand that friend who, back from Lapland, 
told me how oppressed he felt when for days on end he lived 
without seeing the slightest trace of mankind. 


§ 
The flayed man as theoretician of detachment . .. The 
convulsionary as skeptic... 

$ 


A burial in a Norman village. I ask for details from a farmer 
watching the procession from a distance. “He was still young, 
barely sixty. They found him dead in che field. Well, that’s how 
itis... . That's how itis. .. . This refrain, which struck me 
as comical ac the ame, has haunted me ever since. The fellow 
had no idea that whar he was saying about deach was all that can 
be said and all we know. 


$ 
I lil to read the way a chorus girl docs: identifying myself with 
the author and the book. Any other attitude makes me think of 
dissecting corpses. 

§ 


Whenever a man converts to somcthing, anything, we envy him 
at first, chen we pity him, after which we despise him. 


$ 


[9] 


We had nothing to say to one another, and while I was 
manufacturing my phrasc I fek that the earth was falling 
through space and chat I was falling with it at a speed that made 
me dizzy. 

$ 


Years and years to waken from that slecp in which the others 
loll; chen years and years vo escape that awakening .. . 

$ 
A task to be done, something I have undertaken out of necessity 
or choice: no sooner have I started in than everything seems 
important, everything attracts me, except thas. 

$ 
Think about those who haven't long to live, who know that 
everything is over and done with, except the time in which the 
thought of their end unrolls. Deal wich that time. Write for 
gladiator. .. . 

$ 
Erosion of our being by our infirmities: the resulting void is 
filled by che presence of consciousness, what am I saying?—that 
void # consciousness itself. 

$ 
Moral disintegration when we spend time in a place chat is too 
beautiful: the self dissolves upon contact with paradise. No 
doubt it was to avoid this danger that the first man made the 
choice he did. 


[ 94 J 


All things considered, there have been more affirmations than 
negations—at least till now. So we may deny without remorse. 
Belicfs will always weigh more in the scales, 


$ 


The substance of a work is che impossible—what we have not 
been able to attain, what could not be given to us: the sum of all 
the things which were refused us. 


§ 
Gogol, in hopes of a “regeneration,” journeys to Nazareth and 
discovers he is as bored chere as “in a Russian railroad 
station“ this is what happens to us all when we look outside 
ourselves for what can exist only inside. 


$ 


Kill yourself because you are what you are, yes, but not because 
all humanity would spit in your face! 


$ 


Why fear the noching in score for us when it is no different from 
the nothing which preceded us: this argument of the Andenes 
against the fear of death is unacceptable as consolation. Before, we 
had the luck not to exist; now we exist, and it is this particle of 
existence, hence of misfortune, which dreads death. Particle is 
not the word, since each of us prefers himself to che universe, at 
any rate considers himself equal to it. 


$ 


When we discem the unreality of everything, we ourselves 
become unreal, we begin to survive ourselves, however powerful 


{ 93 ] 


our vitality, however imperious our instincts. But they are no 
longer anything but false instincts, and false vitality. 


$ 


If you are doomed to devour yourself, nothing can keep you from 
it: a wife will impel you as much as a tragedy. Resign yourself to 
erosion at all times: your fate wills it so. 


$ 
To live is to lose ground. 
; $ 
To think that so many have succeded in dying! 
§ 


Impossible not to resent those who write us overwhelming 
letters. 


$ 

In a remote province of India, everything was explained by 
dreams, and what is more important, dreams were used to cure 
diseases as well. Ic was according to dreams that business was 
conducted and marters of life and death decided. Until the 
English came. Since then, one native said, “We no longer 
dream.” 

In what we have agreed to call “civilization,” there resides, 
undeniably, a diabolic principle man has become conscious of too 
late, when it was no longer possible to remedy it. 


§ 


Lucidity without the carrective of ambition leads to stagnation. It 


[9%] 


is essential that che one sustain the other, that the one combat 
the other without winning, for a work, for a life to be possible. 


$ 


We cannot forgive those we have praised to the skies, we are 
impatient to break with them, to snap che most delicate chain of 
all: the chain of admiration . . . not out of insolence, but out 
of an aspiration to find our bearings, to be free, to be... 
ourselves. Which we manage only by an act of injustice. 


$ 


The problem of responsibility would have a meaning only if we 
had been consulted before our birth and had consented to be 
precisely who we are. 


$ 


The energy and virulence of my taedium vitae continue to 
astound me. So much vigor in a disease so decrepit! To this 
paradox I owe my present incapacity to choose my final hour. 


$ 


For our actions, for our vitality itself, the claim to lucidity is as 
ruinous as Jucidiry itself. 


$ 


Children tum, and must rum, against their parents, and the 
parents can do nothing about it, for they are subject to a law 
which decrees che relations among all the living: i. e., that each 
engenders his own enemy. 


[9] 


So carefully have we been taught to cling to things that when we 
would be free of them, we do nor know how to go about it. And 
if death did not come to our aid, our stubborness in subsisting 
would make us find a recipe for existence beyond wearing out, 
beyond senility itself. 


§ 


Everything is wonderfully clear if we admit that birth is a 
disastrous or at least an inopportune event; but if we think 
otherwise, we must resign ourselves to the unintelligible, or else 
cheat like everyone else. 


$ 


In a Gnostic work of the second century of our era, we read: 
“The prayer of a melancholy man will never have the strength to 


rise unto God.” . . . Since man prays only in despondency, we 
may deduce that no prayer has ever reached its destination. 
§ 


He was above all others, and had had nothing to do with it: he 
had simply forgotten vo desire. 


$ 


In ancient China, women suffering from anger or grief would 
climb onto platforms specially constructed for them in the street, 
and there would give free rein to their fwy or their lamensations. 
Such confessionals should be revived and adopted the world 
over, if only to replace the obsolete ones of che Church, or the 
ineffectual ones of various therapeutics. 


§ 


[ 98 ] 


This philosopher lacks kaping or, to use the jargon, internal 

form.” He is too fabricated to be alive or even tea sinister 

puppet. Whar bliss to know I shall never open his books again! 
$ 


No one exclaims he is feeling well and that he is free, yet this is 
what all who know this double blessing should do. Nothing 
conderans us more than our incapacity to shout our gand luck. 
5 
To have failed in cverything, always, out of 2 love of 
discouragement! 
$ 
The sole means of protecting ycur solitude is to offend everyone, 
beginning with chose you love. 
§ 
A book is a postponed suicide. 
$ 


Say what we will, death is the best thing nature has found to 
please everyone. With each of us, everything vanishes, every- 
thing stops forever. What an advantage, what an abuse! Without 
the least effort on our part, we own the universe, we drag it into 
our own disappearance. No doubr about it, dying is im- 
moral. 


[9%] 


If instead of expanding you, putting you in a state of energetic 
euphoria, your ordeals depress and embitter you, you can be sure 
you have no spiritual vocation. 


§ 


To live in expectation, to count on the future or an a simulacrum 
of the fucure: we are so accustomed to it that we have conceived 
the idea of immortality only out of a need 10 wait out eternity. 


$ 


Every friendship is an inconspicuous drama, a series of subde 
wounds. 


$ 


Luther Dead by Lucas Formagel. A plebeian, aggressive, verrify- 
ing mask, as of some sublime hog . . . which perfectly renders’ 
the fearures of the man we cannot sufficiendy praise for having 
declared: “Dreams are liars; if you shit in your bed, that’s true.” 


$ 
The more you live, the less useful it seems to have lived. 
$ 


[ 103 } 


Ac twenty, those nights when for hours at a time I would stand, 
forehead pressed against the pane, staring into the dark. 


$ 


No autocrat wields a power comparable to that enjoyed by a poor 
devil planning to kill himself. 


$ 


Educating yourself not to leave traces is a moment-by- 
moment war against yourself, solely to prove that you could, if 
you chose, become a sage. 


$ 


To exist is a state as little conceivable as its contrary. No, still 
more inconceivable. 


$ 


In Antiquity, “books” were so costly that one could not 
accumulate them unless one was a king, a tyrant, or... 
Aristodle, the first to possess a library worthy of the name. 

One more incriminating item in the dossier of a philosopher 
already so catastrophic in so many regards. 


§ 


If I were to conform to my most intimate convictions, I should 
cease to take any action whatever, to react in any way. Bue I am 
still capable of ö,. 


$ 


A monster, however horrible, secretly artracts us, pursues us, 


[ 104 ] 


haunts us. He represents, enlarged, our advantages and our 
miseries, he proclaims us, be is our standard-bearer. 


§ 


Over the centuries, man has slaved to believe, passing from 
dogma to dogma, illusion to illusion, and has given very little 
time to doubts, short intervals between his epochs of blindness. 
Indeed they were not doubts but pauses, moments of respite 
following the fatigue of faith, of any faith. 


$ 


Innocence being the perfect state, perhaps the only one, it is 
incomprehensible chat a man enjoying it should seek to leave it. 
Yer history from its beginnings down to ourselves is only that 
and nothing but that. 


$ 


I draw che curains, and I wait. Actually, I am not waiting for 
anything, I am merely making myself aksent. Scoured, if only for 
a few minutes, of the impurities which dim and clog the mind, I 
accede to a state of consciousness from which the self is 
evacuated, and I am as soothed as if I were resting outside the 
universe. 


$ 


In one medieval exorcism, all che parts of the body, even the 
smallest, are listed from which the demon is ordered to depart: a 
kind of lunatic anatomy treatise, fascinating for its hypertrophy 
of precision, its profusion of unexpected details. A scrupulous 
incantation. Leave the nails! Fanatic but not without poetic effect. 
For authentic poctry has nothing in common with “poctry.” 


[ 205 ] 


§ 


In all our dreams, even if they deal with the Flood, there is 
always, if only for a fraction of a second, some minuscule 
incident we wimessed the day before. This regularity, which I 
have verified for years, is the only constant, the only law or 
semblance of law I have been able to discem in night’s incredible 
chaos. 


$ a 
The dissolving power of conversation. One realizxs why both 
meditation and action require silence. 

$ 


The certainty of being only an accident has accompanicd me on 
all occasions, propitious or injurious, and if it has saved me from 
the temptation to believe myself necessary, it has not on the 
other hand entirely cured me of a certain vainglory inherent in 
the loss of illusions. 


$ 


Rare to come upon a free mind, and when you do, you realize 
that the best of such a mind is not revealed in its works (when 
we write we bear, mysteriously, chains) bue in those confidences 
where, released from conviction and pose, as from all concern 
with rigor or standing, it displays its weaknesses. And where it 
behaves as a heretic to itself. 


5 


If che foreigner is not a creator in che matter of language, it is 
because he wants to do & uell as the natives: whether or not he 
succeeds, this ambition is his downfall. 


[ 106 ] 


§ 


I begin a letter over and over again, I get nowhere: what to say 
and how to say it? I don’t even remember whom I was writing 
to. Only passion or profit find at once che right tone. 
Unfortunately deachment is indifference to language, insensitiv- 
ity to words. Yet it is by losing contact with words that we lose 
contact with human beings. 


§ 


Everyone has had, at a given moment, an extraordinary 
experience which will be for him, because of che memory of it he 
preserves, the crucial obstacle to his inner metamorphosis. 


$ 
I know peace only when my ambitions sleep. Once they waken, 
anxiety repossesses me. Life is a state of ambition. The mole 
digging his tunnels is ambitious. Ambition is in effect every- 
where, and we sec its traces on the faces of the dead themselves. 
§ 


Going to India because of the Vedanta or Buddhism is about the 
same as going to France because of Jansenism. Moreover the 
lattes is more recent, since it vanished only three centuries ago. 


§ 


Not the slightest trace of reality anywhere—except in my 
sensations of unseality. 


§ 


Existence would be a quite impracticable enterprise if we stopped 
granting importance to what has none. 


[ 107 } 


$ 


Why does the Gita rank “renunciation of the fruit of actions” so 
high? Because such renunciation is rare, impracticable, contrary 
to our nature, and because achieving it is destroying the man one 
has been and one is, killing in oneself the entire past, the work 
of millemia—in a word, freeing oneself of the Species, that 
hideous and immemorial ciffraff. 


$ 


We should have abided by our larval condition, dispensed with 
evolution, remained incomplete, delighting in the elemental 
siesta and calmly consuming ourselves in an embryonic ecstasy. 


§ ‘ 


Truth abides in the individual drama. If I suffer authen:ically, I 
suffer much more than an individual, I transcend the sphere of 
my selfhood, I rejoin the essence of others. The only way to 
proceed coward the universal is co concem ourselves exclusively 
with what concerns ourselves. 


$ 


When we are fixatad on doubt, we take more pleasure in 
lavishing speculations upon it than in practicing it. 


$ 


If you want to know a nation, frequent its second-order writers: 
they alone reflect its true nature. The others denounce or 
transfigure the nullicy of their compatriots, and neither can nor 
will put themselves on the same level. They are suspect 
witnesses. 


[ 108 ] 


§ 


In my youth there would be werks during which I never closed 
my cyes. I lived in the unlived world, I had the sense that Time, 
with all its moments, had concentrated itself within me, where it 
culminated, where it triumphed. I moved it onward, of course, I 
was its promoter and bearer, its cause and substance, and it was 
as an agent and accomplice that I participated in its apotheosis. 
When sleep departs from us, the unheard-of becomes everyday, 
easy: we enter it without preparations, inhabi it, wallow in ie. 


§ 


Astounding, the number of hours I have wasted on the 
“meaning” of what exists, of what happens. . Buc chat 
“what” has no meaning, as all serious minds know. Hence they 
devote their time and their energy to more useful undertakings. 


§ 


My affinities with Russian Byronism, from Pechorin to Stavro- 
gin, my boredom and my passion for boredom. 


$ 


X, whom I do not particularly appreciate, was telling a story so 
stupid that I wzkened wich a start: those we don't like rarely 
shine in our dreams. 


$ 


For lack of occupation, the old seem to be aying to solve 
something very complicated, devoting to it all the capacities they 
still possess. Perhaps this is why they do not commit suicide en 
masse, as they ought were they even a trifle less absorbed. 


[ 109 ] 


$ 


Love at its most impassioned does not bring two human beings 
so close together as calumny. Inseparable, slanderer and slan- 
dered constitute a “transcendent” unity, forever welded one to 
the other. Nothing can separate them. One inflicts harm, the 
other endures it, but if he endures it, it is because he is 
accustomed to doing so, can no longer do without it, even insists 
upon it. He knows that his wishes will be gratified, that he will 
never be forgotten, that whatever happens he will be eternally 
present in the mind of his indefatigable benefactor. 


$ 


The monk-errant, the wandering friar—so far, the supreme 
achievement. To reach the point of no longer having anything to 
renounce! Such must be the dream of any disabused mind. 


$ 
Sobbing negation—the only tolerable form of negation. 


$ 


Lucky Job, who was not obliged to annotate his lamentations! 


$ 


Lace at night. I feel like falling into a frenzy, doing some 
unprecedented thing to release myself, but I don't sce against 
whom, against what. 


$ 


Mme d’Heudicourt, Saint-Simon observes, had never spoken 
good of anyone in her life without adding some crushing “but’s.” 


[ 110 ] 


A wonderful definition, not of backbiting but of conversation in 
general. 


$ 
Everything that lives makes noise. What an argument for the 
mineral kingdom! 

$ 
Bach was quarrelsome, litigious, self-serving, greedy for titles 
and honors, etc. So what! A musicologist listing the cantatas 
whose theme is death has remarked chat no mortal ever had such 


a nostalgia for it Which is all chat counts. The rest has to do 
with biography. 


$ 


The misfortune of being incapable of neutral states except by 
reflection and effort. What an idiot achieves at che outset, we 
must struggle night and day to attain, and only by fits and starts! 


$ . 
I have always lived with the vision of a host of moments 
marching against me. Time will have been my Bimam Wood. 
$ 


Painful or wounding questions asked by the uncouth distress and 
anger us, and may have the same effect as certain techniques of 
Oriental medication. Who knows if a dense, aggressive stupidity 
might not provoke illumination? It is certainly worth as much as 
a rap on the head wich a stick. 


§ 


[rs ] 


Knowledge is not possible, and even if ic were, would solve 
nothing. Such is the doubter's position. What does he want, 
then— what is he looking for? Neither he nor anyone will ever 
know. Skepticism is the rapture of impasse. 


$ 


Besieged by others, I try to make my escape, without much 
success, it must be confessed. Yet I manage to wangle myself, 
day by day, a few seconds’ audience with the man I would have 
liked to be. 


$ 


By a certain age, we should change names and hide out 
somewhere, lost to the world, in no danger of secing friends or 
enemies again, leading the peaceful life of an overworked 
malefactor. 


$ 


We cannot reflect and be modest. Once the mind is set to work, 
it replaces God and anything else. It is indiscretion, encroach- 
ment, profanation. It does not build, it dislocates. The tension its 
methods betray reveals its brutal, implacable character: without a 
good dose of ferocity, we could not follow a thought to its 
conclusion. 


$ 


Most subverters, visionaries, and saviors have been either 
epileptics or dyspeptics. There is unanimity as to the virtues of 
epilepsy; gastric upheavals are regarded, on the other hand, as 
less meritorious. Yet nothing is more conducive to subversion 
than a digestion which refuses to be forgotten. 


[ na } 


$ 


My mission is to suffer for all those who suffer without knowing 
it, I must pay for them, expiate their unconsciousness, their luck 
to be ignorant of how unhappy they are. 


§ 


Each time Time torments me, I tell myself that one of us muse 
back down, that it is impossible for this cruel confrontation to go 
on indefinitely. 


$ 


When we are in the depths of depression, everything which 
feeds it, affords it further substance, also raises it to a level where 
we can no longer follow and thereby renders it too great, 
excessive: scarcely surprising that we should reach the point of 
no longer regarding it as our own. 


$ 


A foretold misfortune, when at last it occurs, is ten, is a hundred 
times harder to endure than one we did not expect. All during 

our apprehensions, we lived through it in advance, and when it 

happens these past torments are added to the present ones, and 

together they form a mass whose weight is intolerable. 


$ 


Obviously God was a solution, and obviously none so satisfac- 
tory will ever be found again. 


$ 
I shall never utterly admire anyone except a man dishonored— 


{ #13 ] 


and happy. There is a man, I should say, who defies the opinion 
of his fellows and who finds consolation and happiness in 
himself alone. 


$ 


The man of the Rubicon, after Pharsalus, had forgiven wo many. 
Such magnanimity seamed offensive to those of his friends who 
had betrayed him and whom he had humiliated by treating them 
without rancor. They felt diminished, flouted, and punished him 
for his clemency or for his disdain: he had refused to stoop to 
resentment! Had he behaved as a tyrant, they would have spared 
him. But they could not forgive him, since he had not deigned to 
frighten them enough. 


$ 


Everything that é engenders, sooner or later, nightmares. Let us 
try, therefore, to invent something better than being. 


$ 


Philosophy, which had made it its business to undermine belicfs, 
when it saw Chrisäanity spreading and on the point of 
prevailing, made common cause with paganism, whose supersü- 
tions seemed preferable to che triumphant insanities. By 
attacking and demolishing the gods, philosophy had intended to 
free men’s minds; in reality, it handed them over to a new 
servitude, worse than the old one, for the god who was to replace 
the gods had no particular weakness far either tolerance or irony. 

Philosophy, it will be objected, is not responsible for the 
advert of this god, indeed this was not the god philosophy 
recommended. No doubr, but it should have suspected that we 
do not subvert the gods with impunity, that others would come 


[ ug} 


to take their place, and chat it had nothing to gain by the 
exchange. 


§ 


Fanaticism is the death of conversation. We do not gossip with a 
candidate for martyrdom. What are we to say to someone who 
refuses to penetrate our reasons and who, the moment we do not 
bow to his, would rather die than yield? Give us dilettantes and 
sophists, who at least espouse all reasons. . . 


§ 


We invest ourselves with an abusive superiority when we tell 
someone what we think of him and of what he does. Prankness is 
not compatible with a delicace sentiment, nor even with an 
ethical exigency. 

$ 


More than all others, our relatives are ready to doubt our merits. 
Ic is a universal cule: Buddha himself did not escape it—one of 
his cousins opposed him the mast, and only afterward Mara, the 
devil. 


§ 


For the victim of anxiety, there is no difference between success 
and fiasco, His reaction to the one is the same as to che other: 
both trouble him equally. 


When I tormen: myself a little too much for not working, I tell 
myself that I might just as well be dead and that then I would be 
working sall less. . . . 


[ 115] 


$ 
Rather in a gutter than on a pedestal, 


§ 


The advantages of a state of eternal potentiality seem to me so 
considerable that when I begin listing them, I can’t get over the 
fact that the transition to Being could ever have occurred. 


$ 


Existence = Torment. The equation seems obvious to me, but 
not to one of my friends, How to convince him? I cannot Zend 
him my sensations; yet only they would have the power to 
persuade him, to give him that additional dose of ¡being he has 
so insistently asked for all this time. 


$ 


If we see things black, it is because we weigh chem in the dark, 
because thoughts are generally che fruit of sleeplessness, 
consequendy of darkness. They cannot adapt to life because they 
have not been thought with a view to life. The notion of che 
consequences they might involve doesn't even occur to the mind. 
We are beyond all human calculation, beyond any notion of 
salvation or perdition, of being or non-being, we are in a 
particular silence, a superior modality of the void. 


$ 
Not yet to have digested the affront of being bom. f 
$ o 
To expend oneself in conversations as much as an epileptic in his 
fits. ` 


{ 116 ] 


$ 


In order to conquer panic or some tenacious anxiety, there is 
nothing like imagining your own burial. An effective method, 
readily available to all, In order not to have to resort to it too 
often in che course of a day, best to experience its benefit straight 
off, when you get up. Or else use it only at exceptional moments, 
like Pope Innocent IX, who, having commissioned a painting in 
which he was shown on his deathbed, glanced at it each time he 
had to make some important decision. 


$ 
There is no negator who is not famished for some catastrophic 
ye. 
§ 
We may be sure that man will never reach depths comparable to 
those he knew during the ages of egoistic colloquy with bi God. 
$ 


Not one moment when I am not extemal to the universe! 
.. . No sooner have I lamented over myself, pitying my 
wretched condition, than I realize that che terms in which I 
described my misfortune were precisely those which define the 
first characteristic of che “supreme being.” 


§ 


Aristode, Aquinas, Hegel—three enslavers of the mind. The 
worst form of despotism is the „um, in philosophy and in 
everything. 


[ 157 ) 


God is what survives the evidence that nothing deserves to be 
thought. 


$ 


When I was young, no pleasure compared with the pleasure of 
making enemies. Now, whenever I make one, my first chought is 
to be reconciled, so that I won't have to bother abour him. 
Having enemies is a heavy responsibility. My burden is 
sufficient, I no Jonger can carry that of others as well. 


$ 


Joy is a light which devours itself, inexhaustibly; it is the sun 
early on. 


$ 


A few days before he died, Claudel remarked that we should not 
call God infinite but inexhaustible. As if it did not come down to 
the same thing, or just about! All the same, this concem for 
cxactitude, this verbal sauple at the moment that he was writing 
that his “lease” on life had nearly expired, is more inspiring than 
a “sublime” word or gesture. 


The unusual is not a criterion. Paganini is more surprising and 
more unpredictable than Bach. 


$ 
We should repeat to ourselves, every day: I am one of the 
billions dragging himself across the carth’s surface. One, and no 
more. This banality justifies any conclusion, any behavior or 
action: debauchery, chastity, suicide, work, crime, sloth, or 


[ 118 ] 


rebellion. . . . Whence it follows that each man is right to do 
what he does. 


$ 


Tsimisum. This silly-sounding word designates a major concept 
of the Cabbala For the world to exist, God, who was everything 
and everywhere, consented to shrink, co leave a vacant space not 
inhabited by Himself: it is in this “hole” that the world 
occurred. 

Thus we occupy the wasteland He conceded to us out of pity 
or whim. For us to exist, He contracted, He limited His 
sovereignty. We are the product of His voluntary reduction, of 
His effacement, of His pardal absence. In His madness He has 
actually amputated Himself for us. If only He had had the good 
sense and the good taste to remain whale! 


$ 


In the “Gospel According to the Egyptians,” Jesus proclaims: 
"Men will be the victims of death so long as women give birth.” 
And he specifies: “I am come to destroy the works of woman.” 

When we frequent the extreme truths of the Gnostics, we 
should like to go, if possible, still further, to say something never 
said, which petrifies or pulverizes history, something out of a 
cosmic Neronianism, out of a madness on the scale of matcer. 


$ 


To express an obsession is to project it outside yourself, to hunt 
x down, to exorcise it. Obsessions are che demons of a world 
without faith. 


[ 119 ] 


Man accepts death but not the hour of his death. To die any 
time, except when one has t die! 


$ 


Once we step into a cemetery, a feeling of utter mockery does 
away with any metaphysical concern. Those who look for 
“mystery” everywhere do not necessarily get to the bottom of 
things. Most often “mystery,” like “che absolute,” corresponds 
only to a mannerism of the mind. It is a word we should use 
only when we cannot do otherwise, in really desperate cases. 


§ 


If I recapitulate my plans which have remained plans and chose 
which have worked out, I have every reason to regret that these 
latter have not suffered the fate of the former. 


§ 


“He who is inclined to lust is merciful and cender-hearted; those 
who are inclined to purity are not so” (Saint John Climacus). Ie 
took a saint, neither more nor less, to denounce so distinctly and 
so vigorously not the lies but the very essence of Christian 
morality, and indeed of all morality. 


$ 


We are not afraid to accept the notion of an uninterrupted sleep; 
on the other hand an eternal awakevng (immorality, if it were 
conceivable, would be just that) plunges us into dread. 
Unconsciousness is a country, a fatherland; consciousness, an 


exile. 


[ sao ) 


Any profound impression is voluptuous or funezeal—or both at 
once. 


§ 


No one has been so convinced as I of the futility of everything; 
and no one has taken so tragically so many futile things. 


§ 


Ishi, the last American Indian of his tribe, after hiding for years 
in terror of che White Men, reduced to starvation, surrendered of 
his own free will to the exterminators of his people, believing 
chat the same treatment was in store for himself. He was made 
much of. He had no posterity, he was truly the last. 

Once humanity is destroyed or simply extinguished, we may 
imagine a sole survivor who would wander the earth, without 
even having anyone to surrender fo. 


§ 
Deep in his heart, man aspires to rejoin che condition he had 
before consciousness. History is merely the detour he takes to get 
there, 


§ 


Only one thing matters: learning to be the loser. 


§ 


Every phenomenon is a corrupt version of another, larger 
phenomenon: time, a disease of eternity; history, a disease of 
time; life, again, a disease of mater. 

Then what is normal, what is healthy? Eternity? Which itself 
is only an infirmity of God. 


[ 121 ] 


Without che notion of a failed universe, the spectacle of injustice 
in every system would put even an abulic into a straitjacket. 


8 


Annihilating affords a sense of power, flatters something obscure, 
something original in us. It is not by erecting but by pulverizing 
that we may divine the secret satisfactions of a god. Whence the 
lure of destruction and the illusions it provokes among the 
frenzied of any era 
$ 

Rach generation lives in the absolute: it behaves as if it had 
reached the apex if not the end of history. 

$ 
Any and every nation, at a certain moment of its carcer, considers 
itself chasen. It is at this moment that it gives the best and the 
worst of itself. 


$ 


No accident that che Trappist order was founded in France rather 
chan in Italy or Spain. Granted the Spanish and the Italians talk 
ceaselessly, but they do not sear themselves talk, whereas the 
Frenchman relishes his eloquence, never forgets he is talking, is 


[ :25 ] 


consummately conscious of the fact. He alone could regard 
silence as an ordeal, as an askair. 


§ 


What spoils the French Revolution for me is that it all happens 
on stage, that its promoters are born actors, that the guillotine is 
merely a decor. The history of France, as a whole, seems a 
bespoke history, an acted history: everything in it is perfect from 
the theatrical point of view. It is a performance, a series of 
gestures and events which are watched rather than suffered, a 
specace that takes ten centuries to put on. Whence the 
impression of frivolity which even the Terror affords, seen from 
a distance. 


e 


5 . 
Prosperous societies are far more fragile than the others, since it 
remains for them to achieve only their own ruin, comfort not 
being an idcal when we possess it, still less of one whea it has 
been around for generations. Not to mention the fact chat nacure 
has not included well-being in her caléulations and could not do 
so without perishing herself. 


$ 


If all peoples tumed apathetic at once, there would be no more 
conflicts, no more wars, no more empires. But unforunacely 
there are young peoples, and indeed young people major 
obstacle to the philanthropists’ dreams: to bring it about that all 
men might reach che same degree of lassicude or ineſſeciual · 
ity. eu. 


$ 


[ 126 ] 


We must side with che oppressed on every occasion, even when 
they are in che wrong, though without losing sight of che fact 
that chey are molded of the same clay as their oppressors. 


$ 


Characteristic of dying regimes: to permit a confused mixture of 
beliefs and docuines, and to give che illusion, at the same time, 
that che moment of choice can be indefinitely postponed . . . 

This is the source—the sole source—of the charm of 
pre-revolutionary periods. 


$ 


Only false values prevail, because everyone can assimilate chem, 
counterfeit chem (false thereby to the second degree). An idea 
that succeeds is necessarily a pseudo idea. 


§ 
Revolutions are the sublime of bad literature. 


$ 


The unfortunate thing about public misfortunes is that everyone 
mgards himself as qualified to talk about them. 


$ 
The right to suppress everyone that bothers us should rank first 
in che constitution of the ideal State. 

$ 


The only thing the young should be taughe is that there is 
virtually nothing to be hoped for from life. One dreams of a 
Catalogue of Deapporntmmds which would include all che 


[ 137 ] 


disillusionments reserved for each and every one of us, to be 
posted in the schools. 


$ 


According to the Princess Palatine, Mme de Maintenon was in 
che habit of repeating, during the years after the king’s death 
when she had no further role to play: “For some time now, there 
has prevailed a spirie of vertigo which is spreading everywhere.” 
This “spirit of vertigo” is what the losers have always noticed, 
correctly moreover, and we might well reconsider all history 
from the perspective of this formula. 


$ 


Progress is the injustice each generation commits with regard to 
its predecessor. 


§ 


The surfeited hate themselves—not secretly but publicly, and 
long to be swept away, one way or another. They prefer, in any 
case, that the sweeping be accomplished with their own 
cooperation. This is che most curious, the most original aspect of 
a revohtionary situation. 


$ 


A nation generates only one revolution. The Germans have 
never repeated the exploit of the Reformation, or rather, they 
have repeated but not equaled it. France has remained an eterna) 
tributary of 89. Equally true of Russia and of all nations, this 
tendency to plagiarize aneself in regard to revolutions is at once 
reassuring and distressing. 


[ 138 } 


Romans of the decadence enjoyed only what they called Greek 
leisure (otium grarcum), the thing they had most despised in the 
period of their vigor. The analogy with today’s civilizations is so 
flagrant it would be indecent to insist on it. 


$ 


Alaric claimed that a “demon” drove him against Rome. Every 
exhausted civilization awaits its barbarian, and every barbarian 
awaits his demon. 


$ 
The West: a sweet-smelling rottenness, a perfumed corpse. 


§ 


All these nations were great because they had great prejudices. 
They now have none. Are they nations still? At most, 
disintegrated crowds. 


$ 
The white race increasingly deserves the name given by the 
American Indians: palfaces. 

$ 
In Europe, happiness stops at Vienna Beyond, misery upon 
misery, since the beginning. 

§ 


The Romans, the Turks, and the British could found lasting 
empires because, refractory to all doctrine, they imposed none 
upon the subject nations. They would never have managed co 
wield so long a hegemony had they been afflicted with some 


[ 129 ] 


messianic vice. Unhoped-for oppressors, administrators, and 
parasites, lords without convictions, they had the art of 
combining authority and indifference, rigor and abandon. Ic is 
this art, che secret of che true master, which the Spaniards of old 
lacked, as it is lacking in che conquerors of our own day. 


$ 


So long as a nation keeps the awareness of its superiority, it is 
fierce and respected; once it loses chat awareness, a nation 
becomes humanized, and no longer counts. 


$ 


When I rage against the age, I can calm myself merely by 
thinking of what will happen, of the retrospective jealousy of 
those who come after us. In certain respects, we belong to the 
old humanity, the humanity thae could still regret paradise. But 
those who come after us will not even have the recourse of that 
regret, they will not even have an idea of it, not even the word! 


§ 


My vision of the future is so exact that if I had children, I should 
strangle them here and now. 


§ 


When we think of the Berlin salons in the Romantic period, of 
the role played in them by a Henrietta Herz or a Rachel Levin, 
of the friendship between the latter and Crown Prince Louis-Fer- 
dinand; and when we then think thar if such women had lived in 
this century they would have died in some gas chamber, we 
cannot help considering the belief in progress as the falsest and 
stupidest of superstitions. 


[ 130 ] 


§ 


Hesiod was the first to elaborate a philosophy of history. And 
also launched the notion of decadence. By doing so, what 2 light 
he casts on historical process! If, at the very outset, in the heart 
of the post-Homeric world, he decided that humanity was in its 
iron age, what would he have said a few centuries later—what 
would he say today? 

Except in periods clouded over by frivolity or utopia, man has 
always believed himself on the threshold of the worst. Knowing 
what he knew, by what miracle could he have unceasingly varied 
his desires and his terrors? 


§ 


When, just after che First World War, electricity was installed in 
the village where I was bom, there was a general murmur of 
protest, then mute desolation. But when electricity was installed 
in the churches (there were three), everyone was convinced the 
Antichrist had come and, with him, the end of time. 

These Carpathian peasants had seen clearly, had seen far: 
Emerging from prehistory, they knew already, in chat day and 
age, what “civilized” men have known only recently. 


§ 


It is my prejudice against everything that cums out well that has 
given me a taste for reading history. 

Ideas are unsuited to a final agony; they die, of course, but 
without knowing how to die, whereas an event exists only with a 
view to its end. A sufficient reason to prefer the company of 
historians to that of philosophers. 


$ 


[ 131 } 


During his famous embassy to Rome in the second century B.C., 
Carneades took advantage of the occasion to speak the first day in 
favor of the idea of justice, and on the following day against ic. 
From chat moment, philosophy, hitherto nonexistent in that 
country of healthy ccnduct, began to perpetrate its ravages. 
What is philosophy, then? The worm in the fit. 

Cato the Censor, who had been present at the Greek’s 
dialectical performances, was alarmed by them and asked the 
Senate to satisfy the Acbenian delegation as soon as possible, so 
harmful and even dangerous did he consider their presence. 
Roman youth was not to frequent minds so destructive. 

On the moral level, Carneades and his companions were as 
formidable as the Carthaginians on the military. Rising nations 
fear above all the absence of prejudices and prohibitions, the 
incellecrual shamelessness which constitutes the allure of declin- 
ing civilizations. 

$ 
Hercules was punished for having succeeded in all his undertak- 
ings. Similarly Troy, too happy, had to perish. 

Pondering this vision shared by the tragic poets, we cannot 
help thinking chat the so-called free world, upon which every 
fortune has been lavished, will inevitably suffer Ilion's farc, for 


the jealousy of the gods survives their disappearance. 
$ 


“The French don’t want to work any more, they all want to 
write,” my concierge told me, unaware chat she was then and 
there passing judgment on all old civilizations. 


$ 


[ 132 ] 


A society is doomed when it.no longer has the force to be 
limited. How, with an open mind—too open—can it protect 
itself against the excesses, the mortal risks of freedom? 


§ 


Ideological disputes reach the point of paroxysm only in 
countries where men have fought cach other over words, where 
they have gone to death for words . . . . in the countries, in 
short, which have known wars of religion. 


§ 


A nation which has exhausted its mission is like an auchor who 
repeats himself—no, who has nothing left to say. For to repeat 
yourself is to prove that you still believe in yourself, and in what 
you have said. But a declining nation no longer has even the 
strength to mouth its old mottoes, which once had assured it ics 
preeminence and its pride. 


$ 


French has become a provincial language. The natives don’t 
mind. Only the foreigner is inconsolable on its account—he 
alone goes into mourning for Nuance. 


$ 


Themistocles, by a unanimously approved decree, had the 
interpreter of Xerxes’ ambassadors put to death “for having 
dared use the Greek language to express the orders of a 
barbarian.” 

A people commits such an act only at the peak of its career. It 
is decadent, it is dying, when it no longer believes in its 


[ +33 ] 


language, when it stops believing that its language is the 
supreme form of expression, the language. 


$ 


A nineteenth-century philosopher maintained, in his innocence, 
that La Rochefoucauld was right for the past, but that he would 
be invalidated by the future. The idea of progress dishonors the 
intellect. 


$ 


The further man proceeds, the less he is in a position to solve his 
problems, and when, at the apex of his blindness, he will be 
convinced he is on the point of success, then the unheard-of will 
occur. 


§ 


I would bestir myself, at best, for the Apocalypse, but for a 
revolution . . . To collaborate with an ending or a genesis, an 
ultimate or initial calamity, yes, but not with a change for some 
better or worse 


§ 


We have convictions only if we have studied nothing thor- 
oughly. 


§ 


In the long run, tolerance breeds more ills than intolerance. If 
this is erue, it constitutes che most serious accusation that can be 


made against man. 


[ 134 } 


Once the animals no longer need to fear each other, they fall into 
a daze and cake on that dumbfounded look they have in zoos, 
Individuals and nations would afford the same spectacle if some 
day they managed to live in harmony, no longer trembling 
openly or in secret. 


$ 
With sufficient perspective, nothing is good or bad. The 


historian who ventures to judge the past is writing joumalism in 
another century. 


$ 


In two hundred years (let us be precise!), che survivors of the 
overly fortunate nations will be put on reservations and visited, 
contemplated with disgust, commiseration, or stupor, and with a 
malicious admiration as well. 


§ 


Monkeys living in groups reject, apparendy, those which in 
some fashion have consorted with humans. How one regrets that 
Swift never knew such a detail! 


$ 


Are we to execrate our age—or all ages? 
Do we think of Buddha withdrawing from the world on 
account of bis contemporaries? R 


$ 


lf humanity has such love for saviors, those fanatics who so 
shamelessly believe in themselves, it is because humanity 
supposes they believe in it. 


[ +35 ] 


$ 


The strength of this Statesman is to be visionary and cynical. A 
dreamer without scruples. 


$ 


The worst crimes are committed out of enthusiasm, a morbid 
state responsible for almost all public and private disasters, 


§ 


The future appeals to you? All yours! Myself I prefer to keep to 
the incredible present and the incredible past. I leave it to you to 
face the Incredible itself. 


§ 


“You're against everything that’s been done since the last war,” 
said the very up-to-date lady. 

"You've got the wrong date: Tm against everything that’s 
been done since Adam.” 


$ 


Hitler is without a doubt the most sinister character in history. 
And the most pathetic. He managed to achieve precisely the 
opposite of what he wanted, he destroyed his ideal point by 
point. It is for chis reason that he is a monster in a class by 
himself that is, a monster twice over, for even his pathos is 
monstrous. 


$ 


All great events have been set in motion by madmen, by 
mediocre madmen. Which will be crue, we may be sure, of the 
“end of the world” itself. 


{ 136 ] 


$ 


The Zohar teaches that those who do evil on earth were no 
bener in heaven, that they were impatient to leave it, and, 
rushing to the mouth of the abyss, that they “arrived ahead of 
the time when they were co descend into this world.” 

One readily discems the profundity of this vision of the 
pre-existence of souls, and its usefulness when we are to explain 
the assurance and the triumph of the “wicked,” their solidity and 
their competence. Having prepared their endeavors so far ahead, 
it is not astonishing that they should possess the earth: they 
conquered it before they were here . . , an eternity ago, and 
for all eternity, as a matter of fact. 


§ 


What distinguishes the true prophet from the rest is that he 
stands at the origin of movements and doctrines which exclude 
and oppose each other. 


$ 


In a metropolis as in a hamlet, what we still Jove best is to wacch 
the fall of one of our kind, 


§ 


The appetite for destruction is so deeply anchored within us that 
no one manages to extirpate it. It belongs to our constitution, for 
the very basis of our being is demoniac. 

The sage is a pacihed, withdrawn destroyer. The others are 
destroyers m practice. 


[ 137 1 


Misfortune is a passive, endured state, while makdiction 
supposes an election a mbours, consequently a notion of mission, 
of inner power, which is not implied in misfortune. An accursed 
individual or nation necessarily outclasses an unfortunate individ- 
ual or nation. 


§ 


Strictly speaking, history does not repeat itself, but since the 
illusions man is capable of are limited in number, they always 
rectum in another disguise, thereby giving some uleradecrepit 
filth a look of novelty and a tragic glaze. 


§ 


I read some pages on Jovinian, Saint Basil, and several others. 
The conflict, during the first centuries of Christianity, berween 
orthodoxy and heresy seems no more insane than the one to 
which modem ideologies have accustomed us. The modalities of 
the controversy, the passions at work, the follies and the 
absurdities, are almost identical. In both cases, everything cums 
on the unreal and the unverifiable, which form the very basis of 
either religious or political dogmas. History would be tolerable 
only if we escaped both kinds. True, it would chen cease 
altogether, for the great good of everyone—those who endure it 
as well as those who make it. 


§ 


What makes destruction suspect is its facility: anyone who 
comes along can excel in it, But if to destroy is easy, to destroy 
oneself is less so. Superiority of the ou: cas t over dic agitator or 
the anarchist. 


[ #38 ] 


Had I lived in the early period of Christianity, I too, I fear, 
would have yielded to its seduction. And I hate that sympathizer, 
that hypothetical fanatic: I cannot forgive myself chat conversion 
of cwo thousand years ago. . . . 


§ 


Tom between violence and disillusionment, I seem to myself a 
terrorist who, going out in the street to perpetrate some outrage, 
stops on the way to consult Ecclesiastes or Epictetus. 


$ 


According to Hegel, man will be completely free only “by 
surrounding himself with a warld entirely created by himself.” 

But this is precisely what he has done, and man has never 
been so enchained, so much a slave as now. 


Life would become endurable only among a humanity which 
would no longer have any illusions in reserve, a humanity 
completely disabused and delighted to be so. 


$ 
Everything I have been able to feel and to think coincides with 
an exercise In and-utopia. 

§ 


Man will not last. Ambushed by exhaustion, he will have to pay 
for his too-original career. For it would be inconceivable and 
contra naturam that he drag on much longer and come to a good 
end. This prospect is depressing, hence likely. 


$ 


[ 139 ] 


“Enlightened despotism”: the only regime that can attract a 
disabused mind, one incapable of being the accomplice of 


revolutions since it is not even the accomplice of history. 


$ 


Nothing more painful than two contemporary prophets. One must 
withdraw, must disappear if he is unwilling to expose himself to 
ridicule. Unless both are thus expased, which would be the most 
equitable solution. 


§ 


I am stirred, even overwhelmed each time I happen upon an 
innocent person. Where does he come from? What is he after? 
Doesn't such an apparition herald some disaster? It is a very 
special disturbance we suffer in the presence of someone there is 
no way of calling our And. 


$ 
Wherever civilized men appeared for the first time, they were 
regarded by the natives as devils, as ghosts, specters. Never as 
living men! Unequaled intuition, a prophetic insight, if ever there 
was one. 


$ 
If everyone had seen through everything, if everyone had 
“understood,” history would have ceased long since. But we are 
fundamentally, biologically unsuited to “understand.” Ard even 
if everyone understood except for one, history would be 
perpetuzted because of that one, because of his blindness. 
Because of a single illusion! 


[ 140 ] 


X maintains we are at the end of a “cosmic cycle” and that soon 
everything will fall apart And he docs not doubt this for one 
moment. 

At the same time, he is che father of 2—numerous—family. 
With certicudes lile his, what aberration has deluded him into 
bringing into a doomed world one child after che next? If we 
foresee the End, if we are sure it will be coming soon, if we even 
anticipate it, better to do so alone. One does not procreate on 
Patmos. 


§ 


Montaigne, a sage, has had no posterity. Rousseau, an hystenc, 
stil] stirs nations. I like only the thinkers who have inspired no 
tribune of the people. 


$ 


In 1441, the Council of Florence decreed that pagans, Jews, 
heretics, and schismatics will have no part in “ewmal life” and 
chat all, unless they embrace, before dying, the true religion, will 
go straight to hell. 

In che days when the Church professed such enormities it was 
truly the Church. An institution is vital and srong only if it 
rejects everything which is not itself. Unforrunacly the same is 
true of a nation or of a regime. 


$ 


A serious, honest mind understands—and can undersand—aoth- 
ing of history. History in return is marvelously suited to delight 
an erudite cynic 


{ 24 ] 


Exuaordinary pleasure at che thought chat, being human, one is 
bom under an accursed star, and that whatever one has 
undertaken and whatever one is going to underukr will be 
fondled by mischance. 


$ 


Plotinus befriended a Roman senator who had freed his slaves, 
renounced his weakh, and who ate and slept at the houses of 
friends, for he no longer owned anything. This senator, from the 
“oficial” point of view, was deranged, and his case would be 
regarded as diseressing, which indeed it was: a saint in the Senate. 
. . . His presence, even his possibiliiy—what an omen! The 
bordes were not fr. 


$ 


A man who has completely vanquished selfishness, who retains 
no trace of it whatever, cannot live longer than cwenty-one days, 
according to one modem Vedantist school. No Western 
moralist, not even the grimmest, would have dared venture an 
observation on human nature so startling, so revealing. 


$ 
We invoke “progress” less and less and “mutation” more and 
more, and all that we alle ge to illustrate the lacter’s advantages is 
merely one symptom after another of an unrivaled catastrophe. 


$ 


We can breathe—and brawl—only in a corrupt regime. But we 
realize as much only after having contributed to its destruction, 
and when nothing is left but our capacity to regret it. 


$ 


{ 142 ] 


What we call the creative instinct is merely a deviation, merely a 
perversion of our nature: we have not been brought into the 
world in order to innovate, to revolutionize, but to enjoy our 
semblance of being, in order to liquidate it quietly and to vanish 
afterward without a fuss. 


$ 


The Aztecs were right to believe the gods must be appeased, to 
offer them human blood every day in order to keep the universe 
from sinking back into chaos. 

We long since ceased to believe in the gods, and we no longer 
offer chem sacrifices, Yet the world is still here. No doubt Only 
we no longer have the good luck to know why it does not 
collapse on che spot. 


{ 143 ] 


We pursue whatever we pursue out of torment—a need for 
torment. Our very quest for salvation is a torment, the subtlest, 
the best camouflaged of all. 


$ 


If it is true that by death we once more become what we were 
before being, would it not have been berez to abide by chat pure 
possibility, not to stir from it? What use was this detour, when 
we might have remained forever in an unrealized plenitude? 


§ 
Once my body gives me che slip, how, I wonder, with such 
carrion on my hands, will I combat the capiculation of my 
Organs? 

$ 
The ancient gods ridiculed men, envied them, hunted them 
down on ocasion, harried them. The God of the Gospels was 
less mocking and less jealous, and mortal men did not even 
enjoy, in their miseries, the consolation of being able to accuse 
Him. Which accounts for the absence or the impossibility of a 
Christian Aeschylus, A good God has killed uagedy. Zeus 
deserved differently of literature. 


{ 147 } 


Haunted, obsessed by abdication, as far back as I can remember. 
But abdication of what? If I once longed to be “someone,” it was 
only for the satisfaction of someday being able to say, like 
Charles V at Yuste: “I am no longer anything.” 


§ 


Some of the Provinad Letters were rewritten as many as 
seventeen times. Astounding that Pascal could have expended so 
much time and energy whose interest seems minimal to us now. 
Every polemic date every polemic with men. In the Penés, the 
debate was with God. This still concerns us somewhat. 


$ 


Saint Seraphim of Sarov, in his fifwen years of complete 
seclusion, opened his cell door to no one, not even to the bishop 
who occasionally visited che hermitage. Silence,“ he would say, 
“brings man closer co God and makes him, on earth, like unto 
the angels.” 

What the saint should have added is that silence is never 
deeper than in the impossibility of prayer. 


$ 


Modern man has lost the sense of fate and thereby the savor of 
lamentaion. In the theater we should reinstate the chorus at 
once, and at funerals, the moumers. . . . 


§ 


In anxiety, a man clings to whatever can ceinfotce, can stimulate 
his providential discomfort: to try to cure him of it is to destroy 
his equilibrium, anxiety being the basis of his existence and his 
prosperity. The cunning confessor knows ic is necessary, knows 


[ 148 } 


that we cannot do without anxiety once we have known it. Since 
he dares not proclaim its benefits, he employs a dervur—he 
vaunts remorse, an admitted, an honorable anxiety. I Iis custom- 
ers are graceful; hence he manages to keep them readily enough, 
whereas his lay colleagues struggle and grovel to keep theirs. 


You once told me death did not exist. Aged, provided you add 
that nothing exists. To grant reslity to anything and to deny it to 
what seems so manifestly real is sheer extravagance. 


$ 


When we have commiced che folly of confiding a secret to 
someone, the only way of being sure he will keep it to himself is 
to kill him on the spot. 


$ 


“Sicknesses, some by day, others by night, in their fashion, visit 
men, bearing suffering to mortals—in silence, for wise Zeus has 
denied them speech” (Hesiod). 

Fortunately, for, being mute, they are already excruciating— 
what would they be if they were garrulous as well? Can we 
imagine even onc proclaiming iid? Instead of symptoms, 
declarations! Zeus, for once, has shown signs of delicacy. 


§ 


In periods of sterility, one should hibernate, sleep day and night 
to prexcrve one’s strength, instead of wasting it in mortification 
and rage. 


{ 199 ] 


We can admire someone only if he is three-quarters irtesponsi- 
ble—admiration has nothing to do with respect. 


§ 


The not at all negligible advantage of having greatly hated men 
is chat one comes to endure them by the exhaustion of this very 


harred. 


$ 


Once the shurters are closed, I stretch out in the dark. The outer 
world, a fading murmur, dissolves. All that is left is myself and 

. there's che rub. Hermits have spent their lives in dialogue 
with what was most hidden within chem. If only, following their 
example, I could give myself up to that extreme exercise, in 
which one unites wich the intimacy of one’s own being! It is this 
self-interview, this inward transition which matters, and which 
has no value unless continually renewed, so chat che self is finally 
absorbed by its essential version. 


§ 


Even in God's company, discontent was brewing, as the revolt of 
the angels testi; che first on record. Apparently on every level 
of creation, no one is forgiven his superiority. We might even 
conceive of an envious flower. 


$ 


The virtues have no face. Impersonal, abstract, conventional, 
they wear out faster than the vices, which, more powerfully 
charged with vitality, define themselves and become accentuated 
with age. 


{ 130 ] 


“Everything is filled with gods,” said Thales, at the dawn of 
philosophy; at the other end, at this twilight we have come to, 
we can proclaim, not only out of a need for symmetry but even 
more out of respect for the evidence, that “everything is emptied 


of gods.” 
§ 


I was alone in that cemetery overlooking the village when a 
pregnant woman came in. I left at once, in order not to look at 
this corpse-bearer at close range, nor to cuminate upon the 
contrast between an aggressive womb and the time-wom 
tombs—bctween a false promise and the end of all promises. 


§ 


The desire to pray has nothing to do with faith. It emanates from 
a special despondency, and lasts as long, even while the gods and 
theit very memory may vanish away forever. 


§ 


“No language can hope for anything but its own defeat” 
(Gregory Palamas). 

So radical a condemnation of all literarure could come only 
from a mystic—from a professional of the Inexpressible. 


$ 
In Antiquity, one resorted readily, especially among the philoso- 
phers, to voluntary asphyxia—one held one’s breath until. 
one died. So elegant and yet so practical a mode of being done 
with it has completely disappeared, and it is anything but certain 
it can ever reappear. 


{ 15 ] 


It has been said and said again: the concept of destiny, which 
supposes change, history, does not apply to an immutable being. 
Hence we cannot speak of God's “destiny.” 

Doubtless we cannot, in theory. In practice, we do nothing 
but, paröcularly in che periods when beliefs are dissolving, when 
faith is shaky, when nothing seems able to withstand time, when 
God Himself is swept in:o the general deliquescence. 


$ 


Once we begin to want, we fall under the jurisdiction of the 
Devil. 


§ 


Life is nothing; death, everything. Yet there & nothing which is 
death, independent of life. It is precisely this absence of 
autonomous, distinct reality which makes death universal: it has 
no realm of its own, it is omnipresent, like everything which 
lacks identity, limit. and bearing: an indecent infinitude. 


§ 


Euphoria. Incapable of articulating my habitua! moods and the 
reflections they engender, impelled by same unknown power, I 
cxulted without motive, and it is just such jubilation, of 
unknown origin, I reminded myself, which is the experience of 
those O do and strive, those who Produc. They neither can nor 
will reflect on what denies them. And if they did, it would be of 
no consequence, as was the case for me that memorable day. 


§ 


Why embroider upon what excludes commentary? A text 
explained is no longer a text. We live with an idea, we don’t 


[ +52 ] 


dissect it; we struggle with it, we don't describe the stages of the 
conflict. The history of philosophy is the negation of philosophy. 


$ 


A suspect scruple led me to wonder exactly what it was by which 
I was fatigued, and I began drawing up the list: though 
incomplete, it appeared so long, and so depressing, that I 
decided to fall back on fatigue in itself, a flattering formula which, 
thanks to its philosophical ingredient, might restore a plague 
victim. 


§ 


Destruction and explosion of syntax, victory of ambiguity and 
approximation. All very well. But just try co draw up a will, and 
you'll see if the defunct rigor was so contemptible. 


An aphorism? Fire without flames. Understandable chat no one 
cries to warm himself at it. 


$ 


Even if I were to lose my reason, I could never bring myself to 
that “uninccrrupeed prayer” advocated by the Hesychasts. All I 
understand about piety is its excesses, its suspect outrages, and 
askesis would not interest me a moment if one did not encounter 
there al) those things which are the lot of the bad monk: 
indolence, gluttony, the thirst for desolation, greed, and aversion 
for che world, vacilladon between tragedy and che equivocal, 
hope of an inner collapse. 


{ 153 ] 


I forget which Father recommends manual labor against acedia 
Admirable advice, which I have always followed spontaneously: 
no depression, that secular acedia, can resist puttering. 


$ 


Years now without coffee, without alcohol, without tobacco. 
.. « Luckily, there is anxiety, which usefully replaces the 
strongest stimulants. 


$ 


The worst reproach to be made against police states is chat they 
oblige—for prudence's sake—the destruction of letters and 
diaries, i.e., what is least false in literacure. 


$ 


To keep the mind alert, slander tums out to be as effective as 
disease: the same vigilance, the same fixed attention, the same 
insecunty, the same flagellating hysteria, the same mortal 
enrichment. 


$ 


I am nothing, obviously, but since for so long I wanted to be 
something, I fail to smother that aspiration, that will: it exists 
because it has existed, it belabors me and prevails, though I 
reject it. Try as I do to relegate it to my past, it kicks up again 
and torments me: never having been satisfied, it has maintained 
itself intact, and has no intention of yielding to my orders. 
Caughe berween my will and myself, what can I do? 


$ 


[ 154 ] 


In his Ladder of Paradise, Saint John Climacus notes that a proud 
monk has no need to be persecuted by the Devil—he is himself 
his own devil. 

I chink of X, whose life in che monastery was a failure. No 
one was better constituted to distinguish himself in the world 
and to shine there. Unsuited to humility, to obedience, he chose 
solitude and bogged down in it. There was nothing in him to 
become, according to the same saint’s expression, “the lover of 
God.” Out of irony one can neither create one’s own salvation 
nor help others create theirs; one can merely disguise one’s 
wounds, if not one’s distastes. 


$ 


It is a great force, and a great fortune, to be able to live without 
any ambition whatever. I aspire to it, but the very fact of so 
aspiring still participates in ambition. 


$ 


The blank time of meditation is, in truth, the only “full” time. 
We should never blush to accumulate vacant moments—vacant 
in appearance, filled in fact. To meditate is a supreme leisure, 
whose secret has been lost. 


Noble gestures are always suspect. Each time, we regret having 
committed them. Something false about them, something 
theatrical, attitudinizing. It is true that we regret ignoble gestures 
almost as much. 


[ #55 ] 


If I reflect on any moment of my life, the most feverish or the 
most neutral, what remains?—and what difference is there now 
between them? Everything having become the same, without 
relief and without reality, it is when I felt nothing that I was 
closest to the truth, I mean to my present state in which I am 
recapitulating my experiences. What is the use of having felt 
anything at all? There is no “ecstasy” which either memory or 
imagination can resuscitate! 


§ 


No one, before his last moment, manages to we up his death 
altogether: even for the bom moribund, death has a touch of 
novelty. 


§ 


According to the Cabbala, God created souls at che beginning, 
and they were all before him in the form they would later take in 
their incamation. Each soul, when its time has come, receives the 
order to join the body destined for it, but each to no avail 
implores its Creator to spare it this bondage and this corruption. 

The more I think of what could not have failed to happen 
when my own soul's tum came, the more I realize that if there 
was one soul which more than the rest must have resisted 
incamation, it was mine. 

$ 

We dismiss the skeptic, we speak of an “automatism of doubt,” 
while we never say of a believer that he has fallen into an 
“automatism of faith.” Yer faith is much more mechanical than 


doubt, which has the excuse of proceeding from surprise co 
surprise—inside perplexity, it is true. 


[ 156 ] 


§ 


That faine light in each of us which dates back co before our 
birth, to before all births, is what must be protected if we want 
to rejoin chat cemote glory from which we shall never know why 
we were separated. 


§ 


I have never known a single sensation of fulfillment, of crue 
happiness, without thinking that it was the moment when—now 
or never—I should disappear for good. 


$ 


A moment comes when it seems futile to have to choose 
between metaphysics and amateurism, between the unfathom- 
able and the anecdote. 


§ 


To measure accurately the decline Christianity represents in 
relation to paganism, we need merely compare the pathetic 
remarks of the Church Fathers on suicide with the opinions 
offered on the same subject by a Pliny, a Seneca, and even a 
Cicero. 


$ 


What is che point of what we say? Is chere any meaning to this 
series of propositions which constitutes our talk? And do these 
propositions, taken one by one, have any object? We can talk 
only if we set aside this question, or if we raise it as infrequently 
as possible. 


[ 157 ] 


“To hell with everything"—if these words have been uttered, 
even only once, coldly, with complete awareness of what they 
mean, history is justified and, with it, all of us. 


$ 


“Woe unto you, when all men speak well of you!” Christ was 
here foretelling his own end. All men now speak well of him, 
even the most hardened unbelievers—they above all. Jesus knew 
perfecely well that he would one day succumb »o universal 
approbation. . 

Christianity is lost if it does not suffer persecutions as pitiless 
as those it was subjected to at its beginning. It must provoke 
enemies at all costs, prepare great calamities for itself. Only a 
new Nero might still be able to save it. 


§ 


I believe speech to be a recent invention, and find it hard to 
imagine ‘a dialogue that dates back beyond ten thousand years. 
And even harder, a dialogue that will occur in not ten thousand 
but even a thousand years from now. 


$ 


In a work of psychiatry, only the patients’ remarks interest me; 
in a work of criticism, only the quotations. 


$ 


No one can do anything for this Polish woman, who is beyond 
sickness and health, even beyond living and dying. A phantom 
cannot be cured, still less an enlightened mind. We can cure only 
those who belong to the earth and stil! have their roots in it, 
however superficial. 


[ 158 ] 


§ 


The periods of sterility we pass through coincide with an 
exacerbation of our discemment—with the eclipse of che 
madman in us. . 


$ 


To proceed to the extremities of one’s art and, even further, of 
one’s being: such is the law of any man who regards himself to 
any degree as chosen. 


$ 


Ic is because of speech chat men give the illusion of being free. If 
they did — without a word—what they do, we would take chem 
for robots. By speaking, they deceive themselves, as they deceive 
others: because they say what they are going to do, who cauld 
suspect they are not masters of their actions? 


$ 


Deep inside, each man feels—and believe; himself to be 
immortal, even if he knows he will perish che next moment. We 
can understand everything, admit everything, realize everything. 
except our death, even when we ponder it unremittingly and 
even when we are resigned to it. 


§ 


In che slaughterhouse that moming, I watched the cartle being 
led to their death. Almost every animal, at the last moment, 
refused to move forward. To make them do so, a man hit them 
on the hind legs. 

This scene often comes to mind when, ejected from slecp, I 
lack the strength to confront the daily corture of Time. 


{ 159 ] 


§ 


I pride myself on my capacity to perceive the transitory character 
of everything. An odd gift which has spoiled all my joys; better: 
all my sensations. 


§ 


Everyone expiates his first moment. 


$ 


For an instant, I think I experienced what absorption into 
Brahma might signify for an adept of the Vedanta. How much I 
Jonged for that instant to be extensible—infinitely! 


§ 


I sought in doubt a remedy for anxiety. The remedy ended by 
making common cause with the disease. 
5 


“If a doctrine spreads, it is because heaven has so desired” 
(Confucius). 

. - . As I’should like to believe each time that, faced with 
some victorious aberration, my rage borders on apoplexy. 


$ 


The number of fanatics, extremists, and degenerates I have been 
able to admire! A relief bordering on orgasm at the notion that 


one will never again embrace a cause, any cause... 


§ 
An acrobsc? An orchestra conductor caught up by the Idea? He 


[ 160 ] 


rushes in, then calms down, alternates the allegro with the 
andante, a master of himself like the fakirs or the swindlers. 
While he is talking, he secms to be seeking something, but one 
never knows what: an expert in the art of counterfeiting the 
thinker. If he were co say a single thing that was pecfectly clear, 
he would be lost. Since he is as ignorant as his hearers of what 
he wants to say or what he wants, he can go on for hours 
without exhausting the amazement of the puppets listening to 
him. 


§ 


A privilege to live in conflict with one’s times. At every moment 
one is aware one does not think like the others This state of 
acute dissimilarity, however ir digent or sterile it appears, 
nonetheless possesses a philosophical status which one would be 
at a loss to seek in cogitations attuned to events. 


$ 


"There's no help for it,” che nonagenarian kept repeating to 
whatever I said, to whatever I shouted into her ear concerning 
the present, the future, the march of events. 

In che hope of getting some other response from her, I went 
on with my apprehensions, my grievances, my complaints. 
Obtaining only the sempitemal "No help for it,” I came to the 
end of my patience and left, irritated wich myself, irritated wich 
her. What folly, co confide in an idiot! 

Outside, complete reversal: “But the old woman's right. How 
could:I fail to realize right away that her refrain had a truth in it, 
doubtless the most important truth of all, since everything that 
happens proclaims it and everything in ourselves rejects it?” 


{ 161 J 


Two kinds of intuitions: original (Homer, Upanishads, folklore) 
and belated (Mahayana Buddhism, Roman stoicism, Alexandrian 
gnosis). First flashes and fading glows. The wakening of 
consciousness and the lassitude of being awakened. 


$ 


If it is true that what perishes has never existed, birth, source of 
the perishable, exists as little as the rest. 


§ 


Beware of euphemisms! They aggravate the horror they are 
supposed to disguise. To use, as the French do, “the disappeared” 
instead of the deæased or the dead man, seems to me preposterous, 
even insane, 

$ 


When man forgets he is mortal, he feels inclined to do great 
things, and sometimes succeeds. This oblivion, fruit of excess, is 
at che same time the cause of his woes. “Mortal, chink as a 
mortal.” Antiquity invented a /ragic modaty. 


$ 


Of all the equestrian statues of Roman emperors, the only one to 
survive the barbarian invasions and the erosion of the ages is that 


[ :65 ] 


of Marcus Aurelius—the least “emperor” of all and the one who 
would have adapted himself to any other condition. 


$ 


Gering up with my head full of plans, I would be working, I 
was sure of it, all morning long. No sooner had I sat down at my 
desk than the odious, vile, and persuasive refrain: “What do you 
expect of this world?” stopped me short. And I rerumed, as 
usual, to my bed with the hope of finding some answer, of going 
back to sleep. 


§ 
We make choices, decisions, as long as we keep to the surface of 
things; once we reach the depths, we can neither choose nor 
decide, we can do nothing but regret the surface. . . . 

$ 
The fear of being deceived is the vulgar version of the quest for 
Truth. 

§ 
When you know yourself well and do not despise yourself 
utterly, it is because you are too exhausted to indulge in exareme 
feelings. 

$ 


It is a withering process to follow a docuine, a belief, a 
system—for a writer especially; unless he lives, as often happens, 
in contradiction with the ideas to which he appeals. This 
contradiction, or this creason, stimulates him and keeps him in a 


[ 166 } 


state of insecurity, embarrassment, shame—<onditions favorable 
to production. 
$ 
Paradise was the place where everything was known but where 
nothing was explained. The universe before sin—bcfore amnes- 
$ 


I have no faith, luckily, If I had, I should live in constant fear of 
losing it. Hence, far from helping me, it would do nothing but 
injure me. 

$ 
An impostor, a “humbug,” conscious of being so and therefore a 
self-spectator, is necessarily more advanced in knowledge than a 
steady mind full of merits and all of a piece. 

$ 
Anyone possessing a body is entitled to be called a reprobare. If 
he is afflicted with a “soul” as well, there is no anatheroa to 
which he cannot lay claim 

$ 


How are we to speak to someone who has lost everything? What 
language shall we use? The most diffuse, the vaguest, will always 
be the most effective. 


$ 
Supremacy of regret: che actions we have not performed 


{ 167 ] 


consticute, by the very fact that they pursue us and that we 
continually chink about them, the sole contents of our conscious- 
ness. 


$ 


Sometimes I wish I were a cannibal—less for the pleasure of 
eating someone than for the pleasure of vomiting him. 


$ 


No longer wanting to be a man . . . dreaming of another 
form of failure. 


$ 


Each time you find yourself at a turning - point, che best thing is 
to lie down and let the hours pass. Resolutions made standing up 
are worthless: they are dictated either by pride or by fear. Prone, 
we still know these two scourges, but in a more attenuated, more 
intemporal form. 


§ 


When someone complains that his life has come to nothing, we 
need merely cemind him thac life itself is in an analogous 
situation, if not worse. 


$ 


Works die: fragments, not having lived, cannot die either. 


$ 


Horror of the accessory paralyzes me. Now, the accessory is the 
essence of communication (and hence of thought), it is che flesh 


[ 68 ] 


and blood of speech and writing. Trying to renounce it is like 
fornicating with a skeleton. 


§ 


The satisfaction we take from performing a task (especially when 
we have no belief in the task and even disdain it) shows to what 
degree we still belong to the rabble. 


§ 


My merit is not to be totally ineffectual but to have wanted to be. 


§ 


If I do not deny my origins, it is because it is ultimately better co 
be nothing at all than a pretense of something. 


§ 


A mixture of automatism and whim, man is a robot with defects, 
a robot out of order. If only he remains so, and is not some day 
put right! 


§ 


What every man, whether he has patience or not, has always 
expected is, of course, death. But he knows this only when death 
comes . . . , when it is too late to be able to enjoy it. 


§ 


Man certainly began praying long before he knew how to speak, 
for the pangs he must have suffered upon leaving animality, 
upon denying it, could not have been endured without grunts 
and groans, prefigurations, premonitory signs of prayer. 


[ 169 ] 


$ 


In art and in everything, the commentator is generally berer 
informed and more lucid than the subject of commentary. This is 
the advantage the murderer has over his victim. 


§ 


“Let us offer our thanks to the gods, who keep no one in this life 
by force.” Seneca (whose style, according to Caligula, lacks 
cement) is open to the essential, and this not so much because of 
his affiliation wich stoicism as because of his cight-years’ exile in 
Corsica, particularly desolate at the time. This ordeal conferred 
upon a frivolous writer a dimension he would nor have acquired 
in the normal course of events; it relieved him of the aid of a 
sickness. 


§ 


Mine still, this moment passes by, escapes me, and is buried 
forever. Am I going to commit myself with the next? I make up 
my mind: it is here, it belongs to me—and already is long since 
past. From moming to night, fabricating the past! 


$ 


After having, to no avail, tried everything among the mystics, he 
had only one recourse: to founder in wisdom. . . . 


§ 


Once you ask yourself so-called philosophical questions and 
employ the inevitable jargon, you assume a superior, aggressive 
manner, and this in a realm where, the insoluble being de rigueur, 
humility should be also. This anomaly is merely apparent: che 


[ 170 ] 


more formidable the questions you confront, the more you lose 
your head: ultimately you bestow on yourself the dimensions 
they possess. If the pride of theologians “stinks” even more than 
that of the philosophers, it is because one does not concem 
oneself with God with impunity: one reaches the point of 
arrogating to oneself cerain of His attribute che worst, of 
course. 


$ 
At peace with itself and the world, the mind atrophies. It 
Bourishes at the slightest contrariety. Thought is really no more 
than the shameless exploitation of our embarrassments and our 
disgraces. 

§ 


This body, once loyal, disavows me, no longer follows me, has 
ceased to be my accomplice. Rejected, betrayed, discarded, what 
would become of me if old infirmities, to prove their allegiance, 
didn't come to kecp me company at every hour of the day and 
night? 

$ 
“Distinguished” people do not invent in matters of language. 
On the contrary, the ones who excel there are those who 
improvise out of baastfulness or who wallow in a sentimental 
coarseness. Such men are “natures,” they live on the level of 
words. Is verbal genius, then, the concomitant of low haunts? In 
any case, it requires a certain minimum of odium. 

$ 
We should keep to a single language, and deepen our knowledge 


[ +7: } 


of it at every opportunity. For a writer, gossiping with a 
concierge in his own is much more profitable than arguing with 
a scholar in a foreign tongue. 


$ 


. . . the feeling of being everything and che evidence of being 
nothing.” I happened across this phrase in my youth, and was 
overwhelmed by it. Everything I fele in those days, and 
everything I would feel from then on, was summed up in this 
extraordinary banal formula, the synthesis of expansion and 
failure, ecstasy and impasse. Most often it is not in a paradox but 
in a truism that a revelation appears. 
$ 

Poetry excludes calculation and premeditation: it is incomple- 
tion, foreboding, abyss. Neither a singsong geomeuy, nor a 
succession of bloodless adjectives. We are too deeply wounded 


and too despondent, too weary and too barbarous in our 
weariness, to appreciate, yet, the craft. 


§ 


We cannot do without the notion of progress, yet it does not 
deserve our attention. Ic is like the “meaning” of life. Life must 
have one. But is chere any which docs not tum out, upon 
examination, to be ludicrous? 


$ 


Trees are massacred, houses go up—faces, faces everywhere. Man 
is spreading. Man is che cancer of the carch. 


$ 


[ +72 ] 


There is something enveloping and voluptuous about the notion 
of fatality: it keeps you warm. 

§ 
A troglodyte that will have passed through all che nuances of 


satiety... . 


§ 


The pleasure of slandering yourself greatly exceeds that of being 
slandered. 


§ 


Better than anyone I know the danger of being born with a thirst 
for everything. A poisoned gift, a vengeance of Providence. Thus 
encumbered, I could get nowhere, on the spiricual level, of 
course, the only one that matters. Anything bu: accidental, my 
failure is identifed with my essence. 


§ 


The mystics and their “collected works.” When one addresses 
oneself to God, and to God alone, as they claim to do, one 
should be careful not to write. God doesn't ad. 


$ 


Each time I think of the Essential, I seem to glimpse it in silence 
or explosion, in stupor or exclamation. Never in speech. 


§ 


When you meditate all day on the inopportuneness of birth, 
everything you plan and everything you perform secms pathetic, 


{ 173 ] 


fucile. You are like a madman who, cured, does nothing but 
think of the crisis from which he has emerged, the “dream” he 
has left behind; be keeps harking back to it, so that his cure is of 
no benefice to him whatever. 


$ 


The appetite for torment is for some what the lure of gain is for 
others. 


$ 


Man started out on the wrong foot. The misadventure in 
Paradise was the first consequence. The rest had to follow. 


$ 


1 shall never understand how we can live knowing that we are 
not—to say the least!—eternal. 


$ 
The ideal being? An angel ravaged by humor. 


5 


When, after a series of questions about desire, disgust, and 
serenity, Buddha was asked: “What is the goal, the final 
meaning of nirvana?” he did not answer. He smiled. There has 
been a great deal of commentary on that smile, instead of seeing 
it as a normal reaction to a pointless question. It is what we do 
when confronted by a child’s why. We smile, because no answer 
is conceivable, because the answer would be even more 
meaningless than the question. Children admit no limits to 
anything; they always want to sce beyond, to see what there is 


[ 174 ] 


aferwacd. But there is no afterward. Nirvana is a limit, the limit. 
Ic is liberation, supreme impasse. . . . 


$ 


Existence might well have had some attraction before the advent 
of noise —let us say, before the neolithic age. When will he 
come, the man who can rid us of all men? 


$ 


For all we tell ourselves about not outliving a stillborn babe, 
instead of clearing out at the first opportunity, we cling, with 
lunatic energy, to one day more. 


§ 
Lucidity does not extirpate the desire to live—far from it, lucidity 
merely makes us unsuited to life. 

$ 


God: a disease we imagine we are cured of because no one dies of 
it nowadays. 


$ 


Unconsciousness is the secret, the vital principle” of life. . . . Ie 
is the sole recourse againse the self, againse the disease of being 
individualized, against the debilitating effect of the state of 
consciousness, a state so formidable, so demanding, that it must 
be reserved for athleres alone. 


$ 
Any success, in any realm, involves an inner impovenshment. It 


[ 175) 


makes us forget what we are, it deprives as of the torment of our 
limies. 


$ 


I have oever taken myself for a being. A non-citizen, a marginal 
type, a nothing who exists only by che excess, by the 
superabundance of his nothingness. 


$ 


To have foundered somewhere between the epigram and the 
sigh! 


$ 


Suffering opens our eyes, helps us to see what we would not have 
seen otherwise. Hence it is useful only to knowledge and, except 
for that, serves only to poison existence. Which, one may add in 
passing, favors knowledge further. “He has suffered—hence he 
has understood.” This is all we can say of a victim of disease, 
injustice, or of any kind of misfortune. Suffering improves no one 
(except those who were already good), it is forgorten as all things 
are forgotten, it does not enter into “humanity’s patrimony” nor 
preserve itself in any way at all—it wastes itself as everything is 
wasted. Once again, it serves only to open our cycs. 


§ 


Man has said what he had to say. He should rest now. But 
refuses, and chough he has entered into his “survivor” phise, he 
hdgets as if hc were on the thices hold uf an astonishing career. 


$ 


[ 176] 


A ay means something only in a created universe. If there is no 
creator, what is the good of calling attention to yourself? 


$ 


Nerval: “Having reached the Place de la Concorde, my thougta 
was to kill myself” Nothing in all French literature has haunted 
me as much as that. 


$ 


In everything, only che beginning and the outcome matter, doing 
and undoing. The way toward being and the way out of 
being—that is breathing, whereas being as such is merely an 


asphyxiator. 
$ 


With the passage of time, I am convinced that my first years 
were a paradise. But I am undoubtedly mistaken. If there was 
ever a paradise, I must look for it carlicr than all my ycars. 


$ 
A golden rule: to leave an incomplete image of oneself. 


$ 


The more man is man, the more he loses in reality: it is che price 
be must pay for his distinct essence. If he managed to achieve the 
limits of his singularity, if he were to become man totally, 
absolurely, there would no longer be anything in him which 
would suggest any kind of cxixeme at all. 


§ 


[ 177 } 


Silence in the face of the decrees of fate, che rediscovery, after 
centuries of thundering prayer, of the ancient Be sttl—there is 
our aspiration, there our struggle, if such a word is appropriate to 


a foreseen and accepted defeat. 
$ 


Every success is ignominious; we never get over it—in our own 
eyes, of course. 


$ 


The pangs of truth about ourselves are more than we can endure. 
How pitiable the man (if such a being exists) who no longer lies 
to himself! 


§ 


I shall no longer read the sages—they have done me too much 
harm. I should have surrendered to my instincts, let my madness 
flourish. I have done just che opposite, I have put on the mask of 
reason, and the mask has ended by replacing my face and 
usurping all the rest. 


$ 


In my moments of megalomania, I tell myself that it is 
impossible my diagnoses should be mistaken, that I have only to 
be patient, co wait until the end, until the advent of the last man, 
the one being in a position to substantiate me. 


$ 


The notion that it would have been berter never to exist is 
among those which meet with the most opposition. Every man, 
incapable of seeing himself except from inside, regards himself as 


[ 178 ] 


necessary, even indispensable, every man feels and perceives 
himself as an absolute reality, as a whole, as the whole. The 
moment we identify ourselves entirely with our own being, we 
rext like God, we are God. 

Ic is only when we live at once within and on the margins of 
ourselves that we can conceive, quite calmly, that it would have 
been prefecable that the accident we are should never have 
occurred. 


$ 


If I followed my natural inclination, I should blow up the world. 
And it is because I lack the courage to follow it that, out of 
penitence, I uy to stupefy myself wich che company of those who 
have found peace. 


$ 


A writer has left his mark on us not because we have read him a 
great deal but because we have thought of him more than is 
warranted. I have not frequented Baudelaire or Pascal particu- 
larly, but I have not stopped thinking of their miseries, which 
have accompanied me everywhere as faithfully as my own. 


§ 


At each age, more or less distinct signs wam us that it is time to 
deamp. We hesitate, we procrastinate, convinced that, once old 
age has come at last, these signs will become so clear that any 
further vacillacion would be unsuicable. Clear they are, indeed, 
but we lack suficient vigor to perform the one decent action a 
living man can commit. 


[ 179 ] 


The name of an actress famous in my childhood suddenly occurs 
to me. Who still remembers her? Much more than any 
philosophical meditation, it is demils of this sort which reveal 
the scandalous reality and unreality of time. 


§ 


If we manage to last in spite of everything, it is because our 
infirmities are so many and so contradictory that they cancel each 
other out. 


$ 


The only moments I think of with relief are those when | sought 
to be nothing for anyone, when I blushed at the notion of 
leaving the slightest trace in the memory of a single human 
being. 


$ 
Indispensable condition for spiritual fulfillment: to have always 
placed the wrong bet. 


$ 


If we hope to see the number of our disappointments or our 
frenzies diminish, then on every occasion we must remember 
that we are here to make each other wretched, and that to rebel 
against this state of affairs is to undermine che very foundations 
of communal life. 


$ 


A disease is ours only from the moment we are told its name, the 
moment when the rope is put around our neck. 


5 


[ 160 } 


All my thoughts are turned toward resignation, and yet not a day 
passes when I fail to concoct some ultimatum to God or to 


anyone 
$ 


When every man has realized that his birth is a defeat, existence, 
endurable at last, will seem like the day after a surrender, like the 
relief and che repose of the conquered. 


$ 


As long as we believed in the Devil, everything that happened 
was intelligible and clear; now chat we no longer do, we must 
look for a new explanation for each event, an accounting that 
will be as laborious as it is arbitrary, one which intrigues 
everyone and satisfies no one. 


$ 


The Truth we do not always pursue; but when we do so 
passionately, violently, we hate whatever is egrevion, whatever 
derives from words and forms, all the noble lies, even furthez 
from the truth than the vulgar ones. 


§ 


Only what proceeds from emotion or from cynicism is real. All 
the rest is talent.“ 


$ 


Vitality and rejection go hand in hand. Indulgence, a sign of 
anemia, suppresses laughter, since it bows before all forms of 
dissimilarity. 


{ 181 } 


Our physiological miseries help us to envisage the furure with 
some confidence: they dispense us from tormenting ourselves 
overmuch, they do their best so that none of our long-range 
projects has time to wear out all our available energies. 


$ 


The Empire was falling, the Barbarians were on the move. 
What was to be done, except to escape the age? Happy moment, 
when there was still somewhere to go, when the empty places 
were accessible and welcoming! We have been dispossessed of 
everything, even the desert. 


$ 


For the man who has got in the nasty habit of unmasking 
appearances, event and misunderstanding are synonyms. To make 
for che essencial is to throw up che game, to admit one is 
defeated. 


$ 
X is undoubredly right to compare himself to a “volcano,” but 
wrong to go into details. 

$ 


The poor, by thinking unceasingly of money, reach the point of 
losing the spiritual advantages of non-possession, thereby sinking 
as low as the rich. 


$ 


The early Greeks regarded the psyche as no more than air, wind, 
or at best smoke, and one readily agrees with chem every time 


{ 182 ] 


one wearies of foraging in one's own ego or that of others, 
searching for strange and, if possible, suspect depths. 

§ 
The final step toward indifference is the destruction of the very 
notion of indifference. 

$ 


Walking in a forest between two hedges of ferns transfigured by 
autumn—that is a triumph. What are ovations and applause 
beside ic? 
§ 

To deprecate your own kind, to vilify and pulverize them, to 
attack their foundations, to undermine your very basis, to destroy 
your point of departure, to punish your origins . . . , to Curse 
all chose non-elect, lesser breeds, torn between imposture and 
elegy, whose sole mission is not to have one 


§ 


Having destroyed all my connections, bumed my bridges, I 
should feel a certain freedom, and in fact I do, one so intense I 
am afraid to rejoice in it. 


$ 


When the habit of seeing chings as they are cums into a mania, 
we lament the madman we have been and are no longer. 


[ 183 ] 


Someone we regard highly comes closer to us when he performs 
an action unworthy of him—thereby he releases us from the 
calvary of veneration. And starting from that moment we feel a 
true acachment to him. 


$ 


Nothing is worse than the coarseness and meanness we 
perpetrate out of amidity. 


§ 


Faced with the Nile and the Pyramids, Flaubert thought of 
nothing but Normandy, according to one wimess—nothing but 
the landscapes and manners of the furure Madame Bovary. 
Nothing but thar seemed to exist for him. To imagine is to limit 
oneself, to exclude: without an excessive capacity for rejection, 
no plan, no work, no way of malzmg anything. 


$ 


What in any way resembles a victory seems to me so 
dishonorable chat I can do battle, in whatever árcumsan«e, only 
with the firm intention of gaining the under hand. I have passed 
the stage where beings matter, and I see no reason to struggle in 
known worlds. 


[ 187 ] 


Philosophy is taught oniy in the agora, in a garden, or at home. 
The lecture chair is the grave of philosophy, the death of any 
living thought, the dais is the mind in mouming. 


§ 


That I can still desire proves that I lack an exact perception of 
reality, that I am distracted, that I am a thousand miles from che 
Truth. “Man,” we read in the Dhammapada, “is prey to desire 
only because he does not see things as they are.” 


§ 


I was shaking with rage: my honor was at stake. The hours 
passed, dawn was approaching. Was I going to min my night 
because of a trifle? Try as I would to minimize the incident, the 
reasons I invented to calm myself remained ineffectua). That 
anyone would dare do such a thing to me! I was on the point of 
opening the window and screaming like a madman, when the 
image of our planet spinning like a top suddenly seized my mind. 
My anger subsided at once. 


§ 


Death is not altogether useless: after all, it is because of death 
that we may be able to recuperate the prenatal space, our only 
space. 


$ 


How right it was to begin the day, as men once did, with a 
prayer, a call for help! Ignorant of whom to address ourselves to, 
we will end by groveling before the first cracked god to come 
along. 


[ #88 ] 


Acute consciousness of having a body—that is the absence of 
bealch.. . . Which is as much as to say that I have never been 
well 


$ 


Everything is deception—I’ve always known that. Vet this 
certitude has afforded me no relief, except at the moments when 
it was violendy present to my mind. . . . 


$ 


The perception of che Precarious raised to the leve) of vision, of 
mystical experience, 

$ 
The only way of enduring one disaster after the next is to love 
the very idea of disaster: if we succeed, there are no further 
Surprises, we are superior to whatever occurs, we are invincible 
victims. 

5 
In very powerful sensations of pain, much mare than in very 
slight ones, we observe ourselves, we divide into an external 
witness and the moaning, screaming sufferer. Everything which 
borders on torment wakens the psychologist in each of us, as 


well as che expecimenter: we want to sce how far we can go in 
the intolerable. 


§ 


Whar is injustice compared to disease? True, we may find it 
unjust to be sick. Moreover that is how each of us reacts, without 
troubling as to whether he is right or wrong. Sickness i nothing 


[ «89 ] 


more real than disease. If we call it unjust, we must dare to do as 
much with Being itself—we must speak, then, of the injustice of 
wasting. 

§ 


The Creation, as it was, amounted to little enough; tinkered 
with, it was worth still less. If only it had been left to its truth, 
its primal nullity! The Messiah to come—the real one—is 
understandably slow about putting in an appearance. The cask 
that awaits him is not going to be an casy one: how will he 
manage to deliver humanity from the mania of amelioration? 


$ 


When, getting too used to ourselves, we begin to loathe 
ourselves, we soon realize that we are worse off, that self-hatred 


actually strengthens self attachment. 

$ 
I do not interrupt him, I let him weigh each man’s merits, 
waiting for him to tell me off. . . . His incomprehension of 


others is astounding. Subtle and ingenucus both, he judges you 
as if you were an entity or a category. Time having had no hold 
over him, he cannot admit that I am outside of whatever he 
forbids, that nothing of what he favors still concems me. 
Dialogue becomes pointless with someone who escapes the 
procession of the years. I ask those I love to be kind enough to 


grow old. 
§ 


Panic in the face of anything—of presence, of the void, of 
anything. Original panic. 


[ ¿90 ] 


God ¿s, even if He isn't. 


§ 


D is incapable of assimilating Evil. He acknowledges its 
existence, but cannot incorporate it into his mind. If he were to 
emerge from hell he would be oblivious of his whereabouts, so 
remote is he in his thinking from what falls afoul. . . Not the 
faintest trace of all he has endured in his ideas. Occasionally he 
has reflexes—no more than that—the reficxes of a wounded man. 
Closed to the negative, he does not discern chat all we possess is 
merely a capital of non-being. Yet more than one of his gestures 
reveals a demonic spirit—demonic unawares. He is a destroyer 
obscured and sterilized by Good. 


§ 

Curiosity to measure our progress into failure is che only reason 
we have to grow older. We thought we had reached the limit, 
we thought the horizon was blocked forever, we lamented in the 
thrall of our discouragement. And now we sealize chat we can 
fall still lower, chat chere is something new, that all hope is not 
lost, that it is possible to sink a little further and thus to 
postpone the danger of getting stuck, even paralyzed . . 


“Life seems good only to che madman,” observed Hegesias, a 
Cyrenaic philosopher, some cwenty-three centuries ago. These 
are almost the only words of his we have. . . . Of all oeuvres to 
reinvent, his comes first on my list. 


$ 


[ 191 ] 


No one approaches the condition of a sege if he has not had the 
good luck to be forgorten in his lifetime. 


§ 


To think is to undermine—to undermine onse/f. Action involves 
fewer risks, for it fills the interval between things and ourselves, 
whereas reflection dangerously widens it. 

.. . Sn long as I give myself up to physical exercise, manual 
labor, I am happy, fulfilled; once I stop, I am seized by dizziness, 
and I can think of nothing but giving up for good. 


§ 


At the lowest point of ourselves, when we touch horom and fæl 
the abyss, we are suddenly raised up—defense-reaction or absurd 
pride—by the sense of being superior to God. The grandiose and 
impure aspect of the temptation to be done with ie all. 


$ 


A broadcast about wolves, with recordings of their howls. What 
a language! The most hartrending I know, and I shall ‘never 
forget it. From now on, in moments of excessive solitude, I need 
merely recall those sounds to have the sense of belonging to a 
community. 


$ 


From the moment defeat was in sight, Hitler spoke of nothing 
but victory. He believed in it—he behaved, in any case, as if he 
believed in it—and remained to the end walled up in his 
optimism, his faith. Everything was crumbling around him, 
every day belied his hopes but, persisting in his trust in the 
impossible, blinding himself as only the incurable can, he had 


{ +92 J 


the strength to go on to the end, to invent one horror after the 
next, and to concinue beyond his madness, even beyond his 
destiny. Which is why we can say of him—of the man who 
failed so utterly—that he realized himself better chan any other 
mortal. 


$ 


"Apres moi le deluge” is the unzvowed motto of every person: if 
we admit that others survive us, it is in che hope that they will 
be punished for it, 


$ 


A znologist who observed gorillas in their native habitat was 
amazed by the uniformity of their life and their vast idleness. 
Hours and hours without doing anything . . . Was boredom 
unknown to them? 

This is indeed a question raised by a buman, a busy ape. Par 
from fleeing monotany, animals crave it, and what they most 
dread is to see it end. Por it ends only to be replaced by fear, che 
cause of all activity. l 

Inaction is divine; yet it is against inaction that man has 
rebelled. Man alone, in nature, is incapable of enduring 
monotony, man alone wants something to happen at all 
costs—something, anything. . Thereby he sbows himself 
unworthy of his ancestor: the need for novelty is che charactcris- 
tic of an alienated gorilla 


We come closer and closer to the Unbreachable. When we have 
reached it, that will be the great Day. Alas, we are only on the 


{ 193 ) 


$ 


A nation achieves and retains pre<minence as long as it accepts 
conventions which are necessarily clumsy, as long as it is given 
over to prejudices without regarding them as such. Once it calls 
them by their name, everything is unmasked, cverything is 
com pramised. 

To seek to rule, to take a role, to make the law—such things 
cannot be done without a powerful dose of stupidity: history, in 
its essence, is stupid. . . . It continues, it advances, because the 
nations liquidate their prejudices one after the other. If they were 
to be rid of them all at che same time, there would be nothing 
left but a blessed universal disintegration. 


§ 


One annot live without motives. I have no motives left, and I 
am living. 


$ 


I was in perfect health, I felt better than ever. Suddenly ‘I was 
cold, so cold that I was sure there was no cure for it. What was 
happening to me? Yet this was not the first time I had been in 
the grip of such a sensation. But in the past I had endured it 
without trying to understand. This time I wanted to know, and 
now. . . . 1 abandoned one hypothesis after the next: it could 
not be sickness; not the shadow of a symptom to cling to. Whar 
was I to do? I was baffled, incapable of finding even the trace of 
an explanation, when an idea occurred to me—and this was a real 
relief—that what I was feeling was merely a version of the great, 
final cold—that it was simply death exercising, rehearsing. . . . 


$ 


{ 194 ] 


In paradise, objects and beings, assaulted by light from all sides, 
ast no shadow. Which is to say that they lack reality, like 
anything that is unbroached by darkness and deserted by death. 


$ 


Our first intuitions are the true ones. What I thought of so many 
things in my frst youth seems to me increasingly right, and after 
so many detours and distractions, I now come back to it, 
aggrieved that I could have erected my existence on the ruin of 
those revelations. 


$ 
I remember a place I have been only if I have had che luck co 
experience utter misery there. 

$ 
At the street fair, watching a tumbler grimacing, shouting, 


exhausting himself, I told myself that he was doing his duty, 
whereas I was evading mine 


§ 
To manifest oneself, to produce in any realm is che characteristic 
of a more or less camouflaged fanatic. If we do not regard 
ourselves as entrusted with a mission, existence is difficult; 
action, impossible. 

§ 


The certitude that there is no salvation is a form of salvation, in 
fact it ás salvation. Starting from here, we might organize our 
own life as well as construct a philosophy of history: the 
insoluble as solution, as the only way out. 


[ 295 ] 


§ 


My weaknesses have spoiled my existence, but it is thanks to 
them that I exist, chat I imagine I exist. 


$ 


Man interests me only since he has ceased to believe in himself. 
While be was in his ascending phase, he deserved no more than 
indifference. Now he provokes a new senciment, a special 
sympathy: @mpauionate horror. 


§ 


For all the superstitions and shackles I have rid myself of, I 
cannot regard myself as a free man, remote from everything. A 
mania for desistance, having survived the other passions, wfuses 
to leave me: it torments me, it persevezes, it demands that I 
continue renouncing, withdrawing. But from what? What is left 
to reject? I ponder the question. My role is over, my career 
finished, and yet nothing has changed in my life, I am at the 
same point in it, I must still desist, still and forever. } 


{ 19 ] 


e 5 
g 0 


No position is so false as having understood and still remaining 
alive. 


§ 


When we consider coldly that portion of duration granted to 
each of us, it seems equally satisfactory and equally ludicrous, 
whether it lasts a day or a century. 

“Ive had my time”—no expression can be uttered more 
appropriately at any moment of life, including the Arst. 


§ 


Death is the providence of those who wil] have had che taste and 
che talent for fach- de recompense of all who have come to 
nothing, who wanted not to. . . It warrants chem, it is their 
way of winning. On the other hand, for the others, those who 
have labored to succeed, and who have succeeded: what a denial, 
what a slap in the face! 


$ 
An Egyptian monk, after fifteen years of complete solitude, 
received a packrt of letters from his family and friends. He did 
not open them, he flung them into the fire in order to escape the 
assault of memory. We cannot sus tain communion with ourself 
and our thoughts if we allow ghosts to appear, to prevail. The 


{ 199 ) 


desert significs not so much a ncw life as the death of the past: at 
last we have escaped our own history. In society, no less than in 
the Thetaid, the letters we write, and those we receive, testify to 
the fact that we are in chains, that we have broken none of the 
bonds, that we are merely slaves and deserve to be so. 


$ 


A litele patience and the moment will come when nothing more 
will be possible, when humanity, thrown back on itself, cannot 
take a single step in any direction. Though we may manage a 
general sense of this unprecedented specracle, we should like 


details. . . . And we are afraid we will miss the festivities, not 
being young enough to have the luck to artend. 
$ 


Whether it is spoken by a grocer or a philosopher, the word 
being, apparendy so rich, so tempting, so charged wich signifi- 
cance, in fact means nothing at all; incredible that a man in his 
right mind can use it on any occasion whatever. 


$ 


Getting up in the middle of the night, I walked around my room 
with the certainty of being chosen and criminal, a double 
privilege natural to the sleepless, revolting or incomprehensible 
for the captives of daytime logic. 


§ 


Ie is not given to everyone to have had an unhappy childbood 
Mine was much more than happy—it was crowned I cannot find 
a better adjective to designate what was triumphant about even 
its pangs. That had to be paid for, that could not go unpunished. 


[ 200 } 


$ 


If I am so fond of Dostoevsky’s correspondence, it is because he 
speaks in ie of nothing but sickness and money, the only 
“burning” subieces. All the rest is merely flourishes and chaff 


$ 


In five hundred thousand years, it appears that England will be 
entirely subme-ged. If I were an Englishman I should lay down 
my arms at once. 

Each of us has his unit of time. For one it is the day, the week, 
the month, or die yeas; for another, it is a devade, ur a century. 
. - - These units, still on the buman scale, are compatible with 
any plan, any ask. 

There are some, however, who take time itself for their unit, 
and sometimes raise themselves above it: for them, what task, 
what plan deserves to be taken seriously? A man who sees too 
far, who is contemporary with the whole future, can no longer act 


or even move. 


$ 


An obsession with che precarious accompanies me in every 
circumstance: mailing a letter this moming, I told myself it was 
addressed to a mortal. 


$ 


One absoluce experience, apropos of anything, and you seem, in 
your own eyes, a survivor. 


§ 
I have always lived with the awareness of the impossibility of 


L 207 J 


living. And what has made exisance endurable to me is my 
curiosity as to how I would get from one minute, one day, one 
year to the next 

$ 


The first condition for becoming a saint is to love bores, to 
endure vii. 


$ 
To shake people up, to wake chem from their slecp, while 
knowing you are committing a crime and that it would be a 
thousand times berer to leave chem alone, since when they 
wake, too, you have nothing to offer chem. 


$ 
Port-Royal. In that green vale, so many conflicts and lacerations 
on account of a few bagatelles! Any belief, after a certain time, 
seems gratuitous and inoomprehensible, as does the counter- 
belief which has desauyed it. Only the stupcfaction which both 
provoke remains 

$ 
A poor wrewh who ferds time, who is its victim, its martyr, who 
experiences nothing else, who & time at each moment, knows 
what a cetaphysician or a poet divines only by grace of a 
collapse or a miracle. 

$ 
Those inner ramblings which come to nothing, and by which we 
are reduced to the state of a grotesque volcano. 


$ 


[ 202 ] 


Each time I am gripped by a fit of rage, I begin by being 
ıggrieved and disgusted, chen I tell myself: what luck, what a 
windfalJ! I am sil) alive, I am still one of those Besh-and-blood 


ghosts. 
$ 


There was no end to the telegram I had just received. All my 
prerentions, all my inadequacies were in it. Cerain Gilings I 
myself scarcely aispectrd were revealed, were proclaimed! What 
prescience, and what detail! At che end of the incerminable 
indictment, no due, no trace that permitted me to identify the 
sender. Who could it be? And why this haste, this unaccustomed 
means of communication? Who ever spoke his mind with such 
rigor in his grievance? Where did he come from, this omniscient 
judge who dared not name himself, this coward in possession of 
all my secrets, this inquisitor who allowed no cxtenuating 
circumstances, not even the ones granted by the most hardened 
torturers? I too might have made a misstep or two, I too am 
entitled to some indulgence. I cringe before che inventory of my 
defects, I choke, I cannot bear this procession of truths. . . . 
Cursed telegram— tear it up, and awaken. .. . 


$ 


To have opinions is inevitable, is natural; to have convictions is 
less so. Each time I meet someone who has convictions, I wonder 
what intellectual vice, what flaw has caused him to acquire such 
a thing. However legitimate this question, my habit of raising it 
spoils the pleasure of conversation for me, gives me 2 bad 
conscience, makes me hateful in my own eyes. 


$ 


[ 203 } 


Once upon a time writing semal important to me. Of all my 
superstitions, this one seems the most compromising and the 
most incomprehensible. 


$ 


I have abused the word disput, But what other can I use to 
indicate 2 state in which exasperation is continually corrected by 
lassitude, and lassitude by exasperation? 


§ 


All evening, having tried to define him, we reviewed all che 
euphemisms which allow us not to pronounce, in his regard, the 
word perfidy, He is not perfidious, he is merely tortuous, 
diabolically tortuous, and at the same time innocent, naive, even 
angelic. Imagine, if you can, a mixture of Aliosha and 
Smerdyakov. 


§ 


When you no longer believe in yourself, you stop producing or 
struggling, you even stop raising questions or answering them, 
whereas it is che contrary which should have occurred, since it is 
precisely at this moment that, being free of all bonds, you are 
likely to grasp the truth, discern what is real and what is not. But 
once your belief in your own role, or your own lot, has dried up, 
you become incurious about everything else, even the “truth,” 
though you are closer to it than ever before. 


§ 


In Paradise, I would not last a “season” or even 2 day; then how 
account for my nostalgia for it? I don’t account for it, it has 
inhabited me always, it was part of me before I was. 


[ 204 ] 


$ 


Anyone may now and then have the sense of occupying only a 
point and a moment; to have such a sense day and night, hour by 
hour, is less frequent, and it is from this experience, this darum, 
that one tums toward nirvana or sarasm—or toward both at 
once. 


§ 


Although I have swom never to sin against blessed concision, I 
am still in complicity with words, and if I am seduced by silence 
I dare not enter Ic, I merely prow] on its peripheries. 


§ 


We should establish a religion's degree of truth according to 
what it makes of the Devil: the more eminent the rank it accards 
him, the more it testißes that it is concemed wich reality, that it 
rejects deceit and lies, that it Is serious, chat it sets more store by 
verification than by distraction or consolation. 


$ 


Nothing deserves to be undone, doubtless because nothing 
deserved to be done. Hence we become detached from every- 
thing, from the original as well as from che ultimate, from 
advent as well as from collapse. 


§ 


We know, we feel that everything has been said, that there is 
nothing left to say. But we feel less that this truth affords 
language a strange, even unserding status which redeems it. 
Words are ultimately saved because they have ceased living. 


[ 205 ] 


$ 


The enormous good and the enormous harm I have drawn from 
my cuminations on the condition of the dead. 


§ 


The undeniable advantage of growing old is to be able to observe 
at close range the slow and methodical degradation of our 
organs; they are all beginning to go, some obviously, others 
discreevy. They become detached from the body, as the body 
becomes detached from us: it escapes us, fices us, no longer 
belongs to us. It is a traitor we cannot even denounce, since it 
stops nowhere and puts itself in no one’s service. 


I never tire of reading about the hermits, preferably about those 
said to be “weary of seeking God.” I am dazzled by the failures 
of the Desert. 


$ 


If, somehow, Rimbaud had been able to go on (as likely as 
imagining the day afrer the apocalypse, or a Nietzsche scribbling 
away after Ecce Homo), he would have ended by reining in, 
calming down, by glossing his own explosions, explicating 
them—and himself. A sacrilege in every case, excess of 
consciousness being only a form of profanation. 


§ 


I have followed only one idea all che way—the idea that 
everything man achieves necessarily turns against him. The idea 
is not a new one, but I have lived it with a power of conviction, a 


[ 206 ] 


desperation which no fanaticism, no delirium has ever ap 
proached. There is no martyrdom, no dishonor I would not suffer 
for it, and T would exchange it for no other truth, no other 
revelation. 


$ 


To go still further than Buddha, to raise oneself above nirvana, 
to learn to do without it . . . , to be stopped by nothing, not 
even by the notion of deliverance, regarding it as a mere 
way-station, an embarrassment, an eclipse 


$ 


My weakness for doomed dynasties, for decaying empires, for the 
Moncrumas of forever, for those who believe in signs, for the 
lacerated and pursued, for the drunkards of the ineluctable, for 
the jeopardized, the devoured, for all who are waiting for their 
executioner... 


$ 


I pass without stopping at the grave of that critic whose vitriolic 
remarks I have so often pondered. Nor at the grave of the poet 
who spent his life dreaming of his uldmate dissolution. Otber 
names pursue me, alien names linked to a pitiless and pacifying 
wisdom, to a vision calculated to free the mind from all 
obsessions, even funereal ones. Nagarjuna, Chandrakiri, San- 
tideva—unparalleled swaihbucklers, dialecticians belabored by 
the obsession of salvation, acrobats and apostles of Vacu- 
ity... , for whom, sages among the cages, the universe was 
only a world. 


[ 207 ] 


No matter how many autumns I observe the spectacle of these 
leaves so eager to fall, it still surprises me each üme—a surprise 
in which “a chill down the spine” would pievail were it not for 
che last-minute explosion of a gaiety whose origin I annot 
account for. 


$ 


There are cermin moments when, remote as we are from any 
faith, we can conceive of only God as our interlocutor To 
address ourselves elsewhere seems an impossibility, a madness. 
Solitude, in its extreme reaches, requires a form of conversation, 
also extreme. 


$ 
Man gives off a special odor: of all che animals, he alone smells 
of the corpse. 


$ 


The hours would not pass; dawn seemed remote, inconceivable. 
Actually it was not dawn I was waiting for but oblivion of those 
refracwry hours which refused to stir. Lucky the man condemned 
to death, I told myself, who on the eve of his execution is at least 
sure of having one good night! 


$ 


Will I be able to stand another minute? will I collapse? If there 
is one méreting sensation, it is the one which gives us the 
foretaste of epilepsy. 


$ 
A man who survives himself despises himself without aclnow]- 


[ 208 ] 


edging as much, sometimes without even knowing as much. 


When you live pase the age of rebellion, and you still rebel, you 
seem to yourself a kind of senile Lucifer. 


$ 


If we did not bear the stigmaea of life, how easy it would be to 
secal away, and how well everything would go by itself! 


§ 


Better than anyone I am able to forgive on the spor. My desire 
for revenge comes late, too late, when memory of the offense is 
fading and when, the incitation to action having become 
virtually nonexistent, I have only one recourse: to deplore my 


“good feelings.” 
§ 


Only to the degree that our moments afford us some contact 
with death do we have some chance to glimpse on what insanity 
all existence is based. 


$ 


Uldmately, it is entirely a matter of indifference whether we are 
something, even if we are God. On this, with a little pressure, 
almost everyone might be brought to agree. But how does it 
happen then that everyone aspires to further life, to additional 
being, and that there is no one who strives to sink, to descend 


toward the ideal defaule? 


[ 109 ] 


According to a belief racher widespread among certain uibes, che 
dead speak the same language as the living, except that for them 
words have a meaning contrary to the one they had: large means 
small, near far, black White. 

Does dying come down to that? Still, better than any funcreal 
invention, this complete reversa) of language indicates what is 
unwonted, dumbfounding about death. . . . 


$ 


I am perfectly willing to believe in man’s furure, but how is one 
to manage it when still, after all, in possession of one’s faculties? 
It would cake their vinually complete collapse, and even 
then... ! 


$ 


A thought which is moc secretly stamped by finality is 
interchangeable, worthless, is merely thought... . 


$ 


In Turin, at the beginning of his madness, Nietzsche would rush 
to his mirror, look at himself, tum away, look again. In che train 
that was taking him to Basel, the one thing he always asked for 
was a mirror. He no longer knew who he was, kept looking for 
himself, and this man, so eager to protect his identity, so thirsty 
for himself, had no instrument at hand but che chumsiest, the 
most lamentable of expedients. 


$ 


No one more useless, and more unusable, than I: a darum I must 
quite simply accept, without taking any pride in che fact 


{ aso } 


whatever. So long as this is not the case, che consciousness of my 
uselessness will serve for nothing. 


§ 


Whatever che nightmare, one takes a role in it, one is 
the protagonist, one is something. It is at night that the 
disinherited man triumphs. If we were to suppress bad dreams, 
there would be mass revolutions. 


§ 


Terror of the future is always grafted onto the dei to experience 
chat terror. 


$ 


Suddenly I was alone with . . . I felt, that afternoon of my 
childhood, that a very serious event had just occurred. It was my 
first awakening, the first indication, the premonitory sign of 
consciousness, Before that I had been only a being. From that 
moment, I was more and less chan chat. Each self begins wich a 
rife and a cevelation. 


$ 


Birh and chain are synonyms. To see the light of day, to see 
shackles... 


$ 
To say “Everything is illusory” is to court illusion, to accord it a 
high degree of reality, the highest in fact, whereas on che 
contrary one wanted to discredit it. The solution? To stop 
proclaiming or denouncing it, serving it by thinking about it. 
The very idea that disqualifies all ideas is a fetter. 


[ an } 


§ 
If we could sleep twenty-four hours a day, we would soon etum 
to the primordial slime, the beatitude of thae perfect torpor 
before Genesis—the dream of every consciousness sick of itself. 
$ 
Not to be born is undoubtedly the best plan of all. Unfortunately 
it is within no one's reach. 
$ 


No one has loved this world more than I, and yet if it had been 
offered to me, even as a child, on a platter, I should have 
shricked, Too late, too late!“ 


$ 


“What's wrong—what’s the matter with you?” Nothing, noth- 
ing’s the matter, I've merely taken a leap outside my fate, and 
now I don’t know where to turn, what to run for... . 


1272] 


0.gif ¬