MEMOIRS OF 
MY NERVOUS 
ILLNESS 

















US $18.95 / CAN $23.00 / UK £10. Us $18.95 / CAN $23.00 / UK £10.99 _ 
ISBN 978-0-940322-20-2 


nm 


9"780940"322202 





NEW YORK REVIEW BOOKS 


CLASSICS 


MEMOIRS OF 
MY NERVOUS ILLNESS 


DANIEL PAUL SCHREBER (1842-1911) was the son of the 
preeminent nineteenth-century German medical authority on 
child-rearing. Before his mental collapse, he served as the chief 
justice of the supreme court of the state of Saxony. 


ROSEMARY DINNAGE is the author of One to One: Experi- 
ences of Psychotherapy. She lives in London. 





MEMOIRS OF 
MY NERVOUS ILLNESS 


Daniel Paul Schreber 


Introduction by 


ROSEMARY DINNAGE 


Translated and Edited by 
IDA MACALPINE 
and 


RIGHARD A. HUN TER 


NEW YORK REVIEW BOOKS 


New York 


THIS IS A NEW YORK REVIEW BOOK 


PUBLISHED BY THE NEW YORK REVIEW OF BOOKS 


Copyright © 1955 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College 
Introduction Copyright © 2000 by Rosemary Dinnage 
All rights reserved. 


Reprinted by arrangement with Harvard University Press 


This edition published in 2000 in the United States of America by 
The New York Review of Books 
435 Hudson Street 
New York, NY 10014 
www.nyrb.com 


CONTENTS 


57910864 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Schreber, Daniel Paul, 1842-1911. Introduction 

[Denkwiirdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken. English] 

Memoirs of my nervous illness / by Daniel Paul Schreber ; 
introduction by Rosemary Dinnage ; translated and edited by Ida 
Macalpine, Richard A. Hunter. 

Pp. cm. Preface 

Reprint. Originally published: London : W. Dawson, 1955. 

ISBN 0-940322-20-X (pbk.: alk. paper) 

1. Schreber, Daniel Paul, 1842-1911—Mental health. 2. Paranoia— 
Patients—Germany Biography. 3. Paranoia Case studies. I. Title. 
RC520.833A313 2000 MEMOIRS 
616.89'7'0092—dec 21 


[B] 99-35601 


MEMOIRS OF MY NERVOUS ILLNESS 


Open letter to Professor Flechsig 


Introduction 


ISBN 978-0-940322-20-2 


Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper. 


Grateful acknowledgement is made to Philip Smith and, 
especially, Rosebud Pettet for their help in obtaining the 
image from Harry Smith’s film Heaven and Earth Magic 
that appears on the cover. 


God and Immortality 
Crisis in God’s realms? Soul murder 


(Not printed} 


33 


43 


Contents 


10 


11 


12 


18 


Personal experiences during the first and the 
beginning of the second nervous illness 


Continuation. Nerve-language (inner voices). 
Compulsive thinking. Unmanning under 
certain circumstances a postulate of the 
Order of the World 


Personal experiences continued. 
Visions. “Seer of spirits” 


Personal experiences continued; peculiar 
manifestations of illness. Visions 


Personal experiences while in Dr. Pierson’s 
Asylum. “Tested souls” 


Transfer to Sonnenstein. Changes in the 
contact with rays. “The writing-down-system”; 
“Tying-to-celestial-bodies” 


Personal experiences at Sonnenstein. 
“Interferences” accompanying contact with 
the rays. “Creation of a false feeling” 


Bodily integrity damaged by miracles 
Content of the voices’ talk. 
“Soul-conception.” Soul-language. 


Continuation of personal experiences 


The soul's state of Blessedness as a factor in 
attraction. Consequences thereof 


44 


54 


69 


85 


99 


115 


130 


141 


152 


163 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


ai 


22 


Contents 


“Tested souls”; their fate. 
Personal experiences continued 176 


“Play-with-human-beings” and “Miracles.” 
Cries of help. Talking birds 185 


Compulsive thinking. 
Its effects and manifestation 197 


Continuation of the above; “Picturing” 
in the sense of the soul-language 207 


God and the processes of creation; 

spontaneous generation; insects created 

by miracles. “Direction of gaze.” 
System-of-examination 215 


Continuation of the above. God’s 
omnipotence and man’s freedom of will 225 


Egocentricity of the rays regarding my person. 
Further developments of personal affairs 233 


Blessedness and voluptuousness in their 

mutual relation. Consequences of this 

relation for personal behavior 242 
Final considerations. Future prospects 253 


POSTSCRIPTS 


First Series 
Miracles 263 


Contents 


II 


i 


VI 


VII 


Relation of divine and human intelligence 
Play-with-human-beings 
Hallucinations 


The nature of God manifested through 
nerve-contact 


Final considerations; Miscellaneous 
Cremation 
Second Series 

APPENDIX 


Essay: “In what circumstances can a person 


considered insane be detained in an Asylum 


against his declared will?” 
Postscript 
Second Postscript 


ADDENDA 


DOCUMENTS FROM THE COURT PROCEEDINGS 


PLACING ME UNDER TUTELAGE 


Medical expert's report to the Court 
of 9th December 1899 by Dr. Weber 


265 


266 


268 


277 


290 


296 


300 


313 


322 


323 


327 


Dr. Weber’s report as County and Asylum 
Medical Officer of 28th November 1900 


Grounds of appeal 
Dr. Weber’s expert report of 5th April 1902 


Judgment of the Royal Superior Country 
Court of Dresden of 14th July 1902 


Notes 


Contents 


337 


349 


388 


405 


441 


INTRODUCTION 


SCHREBER’S Memoirs of My Nervous Illness must be the 
most written-about document in all psychiatric literature. 
Over the years, a huge bibliography of books and articles— 
chiefly in German and in English—has accrued. Successive 
generations of psychiatric writers have used the book as the 
nub of successive theories. From the time that Freud’s cele- 
brated paper about it was published in 1911,' everyone has had 
something to say about Schreber. 

Schreber himself believed his book to have a message for 
the world: not only to expose the nature of the illness he had 
suffered but, more importantly for him, to pass on some kind 
of cloudy divine revelation. For the writing comes straight 
from the borderline between sanity and madness. Based on jot- 
tings made at the peak of his illness, the book was put together 
when he was approaching recovery, with some of the resources 


1. Freud, S. (1911) “Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of a case 
of paranoia (dementia paranoides},” Standard Edition, 12:9-79. 


xi 


Introduction 


of his fine mind once again available. He wanted it to become 
known, and so it has; because in its vividness and abundant de- 
tail it touches on so many of our assumptions about reality, 
about the structure of our perceived world, its space and time 
and objective identity. Schreber in his suffering and insanity 
saw all these dissolve away, and re-form into the stuff of myth 
and nightmare. 

The Memoirs were recognized as remarkable from their 
publication in 1903; medical reviewers recommended col- 
leagues to read them. Nevertheless if Freud had not been so in- 
trigued by them, Schreber’s story might by now be forgotten. 
Both Freud and Jung were fascinated by the book, and already 
in 1910 Freud was writing jokingly to Jung that the “wonderful 
Schreber” ought to have been made a professor of psychiatry 
and director of an asylum. It was Jung, always particularly in- 
terested in psychosis, who had first drawn his colleague’s at- 
tention to it, and the two men would borrow Schreberisms 
such as fltichtige hingemacht, or “fleetingly-improvised,” in 
their correspondence. After the break between them, however, 
Jung described Freud’s interpretation of the Schreber case in 
terms of homosexual wishes as “very unsatisfactory.” In re- 
cent times Schreber has been discussed particularly in relation 
to the writings of his father, a renowned German authority on 
child-rearing—firstly by the psychoanalyst W.G. Niederland 
and then in a more popular version in Morton Schatzman’s 
Soul Murder (1975). 

Moritz Schreber was in fact hugely influential. As late as 
the 1930s (I am told by a German friend) German children 
were being threatened with the Schreber Geradehalter, a 
contraption of boards and straps, if they did not sit up straight. 
He had a system and a manual for everything—the cold-water 
health system, the system to cure harmful body habits, indoor 
gymnastic systems for health preservation, outdoor play sys- 
tems, the lifelong systematic diet guide. But of his two sons, 


Xi 


Introduction 


one committed suicide and one (Paul, author of the Memoirs) 
went mad; Moritz himself entered a deep and isolating depres- 
sion ten years before his death and while Paul was still in his 
teens. 

Paul Schreber was born in 1842 and grew up to become a 
lawyer, and then a judge; he married, but the couple had still- 
births and miscarriages and no surviving children. His first 
breakdown came when he was 42; he recovered well from it 
until 1893, when at the age of 51 he lapsed disastrously again 
and disappeared into the hospital, voluntarily at first, for nine 
years. The Memoirs were written while he was in Sonnenstein 
public asylum, as an account of what he believed were his 
unique experiences and as a plea for release. 

After two years of legal wrangles, Paul Schreber was re- 
leased to his home and spent some apparently peaceful years 
with his wife and adopted daughter. But when his wife Sabine 
had an incapacitating stroke he fell ill again, and from then un- 
til his death in 1911 remained in the asylum. “Speaks only 
very rarely with the doctor,” his hospital records noted, “and 
then only that he is being tortured with the food that he can- 
not eat, etc. Continually under the tormenting influence of his 
hallucinations. Sleep at night mostly poor. Moans, stands in 
bed, stands rigidly in front of the window with eyes closed and 
an expression of listening on his face.” From time to time the 
tragic patient would scribble words on scraps of paper: “mira- 
cles”—”tomb”—“not eat.” His wish had been that “when my 
last hour finally strikes I will no longer find myself in an 
Asylum, but in orderly domestic life surrounded by my near 
relatives, as I may need more loving care than I could get in an 
Asylum.” It was not to be granted. 

Freud’s basic interpretation of the case—drawn from the 
Memoirs, for he never tried to meet the man—was what might 
be expected from his views at the time: Schreber’s fantasy of 
being turned into a woman {one of his psychotic symptoms} 


Introduction 


indicated repressed homosexual love for his father in the shape 
of the asylum director Flechsig (Flechsig figures as a sort of 
malign demigod throughout the Memoirs}. One has to agree 
with Jung that as an interpretation this was very limited— 
though Freud did add that “much more material remains to be 
gathered from the symbolic content of the fantasies and delu- 
sions of this gifted paranoiac.” When Schreber in his isolation 
began to believe that the whole world had been devastated, 
with only himself chosen by God to repopulate the world from 
his womb, he was surely representing his own life’s devasta- 
tion rather than expressing a homosexual wish. And since he 
and his wife had failed to produce a living child, it would be 
compensated for by the new Schreber race that God planned 
to bring out of him. This was not so much a matter of desiring 
men as of identifying with the fecundity of women—but Freud 
put the father-son relation at the center of his analysis and, as 
usual, left women and mothers well out of the picture. 

Again, in writing that he came to have “a thing between [his] 
legs which hardly resembled at all a normally formed male or- 
gan,” Schreber would seem to have been summing up all his 
degradations in the asylum, the loss of his friends and profes- 
sion, the dissappearance of his married life. As Professor Zvi 
Lothane has pointed out in his reassessment of many implica- 
tions of the case, out of all the writers who have had their say 
about it, only one—Thomas Szasz—has criticized Freud for 
devoting page after page to speculations on the nature of 
Schreber’s illness but not a word to the miseries of his impris- 
onment.? People put into the hospital because their mental life 
has smashed may be describing the horrors they are going 
through currently, as well as the traumas of childhood. 

It is not hard to see why in Schreber's fantasies his psy- 
chiatrists were cruel and all-powerful. Flechsig, director of the 


2. Lothane, Z. (1992) In Defense of Schreber. Soul Murder and Psychiatry. 


Introduction 


first asylum, was primarily a neuroanatomist, with a guiding 
maxim that “mental disorders are brain disorders.” Drugs 
and physical restraints—straps, railings, padded cells—were 
his methods of treatment; women patients might have their 
ovaries or uterus taken out. In any case, he confided to a 
colleague, he had little real interest in psychiatry, which he 
considered a “hopeless science.” The head of the public asy- 
lum to which Schreber was sent afterwards, Guido Weber, was 
of the same kind, and opposed Schreber’s eventual discharge 
from the asylum strongly enough to delay it for some time. 

Freud himself, however, for all that his interpretation of the 
case now seems so wrong-headed, did see the delusions that 
characterize madness as the real and interesting creations of a 
human being. Creating them was for Freud a work, a process— 
Wahnbildungsarbeit, or the “work of delusion-formation.” 
Even more strikingly, Freud proposed the idea that delusional 
systems are a means of keeping the patient going, holding a 
world together: 


The end of the world is a projection of this internal 
catastrophe: his i.e. the paranoiac’s subjective world has 
come to an end since his withdrawal of his love for it. 
And the paranoiac builds it again, not more splendid, 
it is true, but at least so that he can once more live in it. 
He builds it up by the work of his delusions. The delu- 
sional formation, which we take to be the pathological 
product, is in reality an attempt at recovery, a process of 
reconstruction. [Italics Freud’s.] 


Such an insight would have been quite foreign to a Flechsig or 
a Weber. 

If much of the delusional world that Paul Schreber describes 
in the Memoirs reflects the real world around him, behind 
that we can see the structure of his upbringing within the 


xv 


Introduction 


Moritz Schreber childcare system. As expounded in Moritz’s 
thirty-odd books, this was indeed sinister. Suppression, con- 
trol, total obedience are the keynotes. The child’s “crude na- 
ture” and “ignoble parts” are to be erased at all costs. 
Obedience must be blind: “The idea should never cross the 
child’s mind that his will might prevail.” Even babies conform: 
“respected threatening gestures” will be enough to silence 
them. Some of the books are illustrated by pictures of special 
equipment, which certainly seems not unlike that used in the 
asylum by Flechsig: the head holder, the bed straps, the chin 
band, and of course the Geradehalter. There are, certainly, 
some references in the books to loving attitudes, occasional 
“playing-together” and “joking-together.” But one feels that 
the joking-together of the Schreber family may have had a cer- 
tain grim quality. 

The capricious, punitive God of Schreber’s delusionary 
world does seem made in the image of his father. God, like the 
paterfamilias of the childcare manuals, “did not really under- 
stand the living human being and had no need to understand 
him, because, according to the Order of the World, He dealt 
only with corpses”; this has “run like a red thread through my 
entire life.” Moritz Schreber in effect forsook his son, too, by 
withdrawing into depression and then by dying so early. As 
well as this, the boy must have grown up among the contradic- 
tory messages that writers such as R.D. Laing find typical of 
schizophrenics’ families: the child hears that everything is be- 
ing done for the best, while getting messages of anger or hate at 
the same time. In the asylum, it was a most irrational God 
that tormented him. His particular misfortune was to be 
reared not just by a stern father but by the famous child- 
rearing expert, celebrated for his Orthopedic Institute, his 
books, his Schrebergdrten. How could he be wrong? 

Moritz’s demand for blind obedience, Paul’s rebound 
into delusions of omnipotence, have been linked—by Elias 


Introduction 


Canetti,> later by the psychoanalyst Heinz Kohut*—with 
German totalitarianism. This may seem too far-fetched an as- 
sociation. And yet Hitler’s generation was growing up at a 
time when Moritz Schreber’s books of “household totalitarian- 
ism”—Schatzman’s excellent phrase—were still popular. At 
the least the Moritz Schreber system seems to reflect a 
German obsession with the deadly obedience, also instilled in 
military academies, that was to be demanded of the Ss. 

In a sense, as Zvi Lothane has pointed out in In Defense of 
Schreber, the Memoirs are a rewriting of Moritz’s message to 
posterity, an alternative version. In the asylums Paul discov- 
ered horrifying systems running the universe, and made it his 
quest to decode them, “patch over the rent” in the world. 
Flechsig and Weber, and their asylums, claimed to be caring for 
him, but transmitted a different message; his wife was said to 
love him, but did not visit. There must therefore be a plot 


to hand me over to another human being... in such a 
way that my soul was handed to him, but my body— 
transformed into a female body and, misconstruing the 
above-described fundamental tendency of the Order of 
the World—was then left to that human being for sexual 
misuse and simply “forsaken,” in other words left to rot. 
One does not seem to have been quite clear what was to 
happen to such a “forsaken” human being.... Naturally 
such matters were not mentioned by Professor Flechsig 
when he faced me as a human being. But the purpose 
was clearly expressed in the nerve-language.... Com- 
pletely cut off from the outside world, without any 
contact with my family, left in the hands of rough atten- 
dants with whom, the inner voices said, it was my duty 


3. Canetti, E. (1962) Crowds and Power. 
4. Kohut, H. (1971) The Analysis of the Self. 


Taral 
xvil 


Introduction 


to fight now and then to prove my manly courage, I 
could think of nothing else but that any manner of 
death, however frightful, was preferable to so degrading 
an end. 


The key word is forsaken. The Memoirs are an account of 
what it is to be forsaken by everything familiar and real, and of 
the delusionary world that gets invented in its place. As Freud 
said, “the delusion is found applied like a patch over the place 
where originally a rent has appeared in the ego’s relation to the 
external world.” 

The complicated, mythic universe that Schreber in his cap- 
tivity created—an affair of rays and miracles, upper and lower 
gods, souls and soul murder, voices of nerve language, strug- 
gles against the “Order of the World”—concerned itself with 
issues of realness and unreality, identity and fusion, power and 
passivity. His own identity having been invaded, fragmented, 
distorted, and annihilated, a story had to be found that made 
sense of it. The more massive the violations, the more grandiose 
the explanations. He was forsaken; so “since the dawn of the 
world there can hardly have been a case like mine, in which a 
human being entered into continual contact... with the total- 
ity of all souls and with God’s omnipotence itself.” He was 
shut away and forgotten; so “since God entered into nerve- 
contact with me exclusively, I became in a way for God the 
only human being, or simply the human being around whom 
everything turns.” Nobody cared if he lived or died; so “what 
detailed measures God would have to adopt after my death I 
feel I can hardly as much as speculate on.” All meaning had 
left his life; so “it is still my conviction that this is the truth— 
that I had to solve one of the most intricate problems ever set 
for man and that I had to fight a sacred battle for the greatest 
good of mankind.” He was totally lonely; so crowds of shad- 
owy figures flitted in and out of his body (at one time, no less 


a) 
Xvill 
ee 


Introduction 


than 240 Benedictine monks, led by a Jesuit Father!]. His mind 
had been emptied; so it was taken over by compulsions—“ the 
nature of compulsive thinking lies in a human being having to 
think incessantly; in other words, man’s natural right to give 
the nerves of his mind their necessary rest ... was from the be- 
ginning denied me by the rays.” So the emptiness of his cell 
was filled up with tormenting activity. But as his plight be- 
came more terrifying, “bad news came in from all sides that 
even this or that star or this or that group of stars had to be 
‘given up’; at one time it was said that even Venus had been 
‘flooded,’ at another that the whole solar system would now 
have to be ‘disconnected. ’” 

Schreber’s delusionary systems are a kind of unconscious 
parody of the preoccupations of philosophy: How did he know 
who he was? That anyone else existed? What was time? Was 
there free will? In particular: What was real and what was not? 
His views on this were formed by his forsakenness. As he was 
moved from Flechsig’s private asylum to the more brutal pub- 
lic one of Weber, his ability to believe in the realness of other 
people waned, and he arrived at the concept of “fleetingly- 
improvised” people. These creatures—as perhaps they do for 
the infant—arbitrarily appeared and disappeared, no longer 
having the solidity he would once have ascribed to them. 
During the journey to Sonnenstein public asylum he caught a 
glimpse of the outside world, but “I did not know whether 
to take the streets of Leipzig through which I traveled as only 
theater props, perhaps in the fashion in which Prince Potem- 
kin is said to have put them up for Empress Catherine II of 
Russia during her travels through the desolate country, so as to 
give her the impression of a flourishing countryside.” He was 
inclined to believe, in any case, that the rest of the human race 
had in fact perished, for “the impression gained hold of me 
that the period in question, which, according to human calcu- 
lation, stretched over only three to four months, had covered 


Introduction 


an immensely long period. ... [I] therefore thought I was the 
last real human being left, and that the few human shapes 
whom I saw... were only ‘fleetingly-improvised-men’ created 
by miracle.” He had no watch, and his shutters were locked at 
night, so that “I regarded the starry sky as largely, if not 
wholly, extinguished.” 

Schreber’s identity underwent startling changes. These are 
reminiscent of William James’s description of self-fragmentation 
during insanity in his Principles of Psychology: 


One patient has another self that repeats all his thoughts 
for him.... Another has two bodies, lying in different 
beds. Some patients feel as if they had lost parts of their 
bodies, teeth, brains, stomach, etc. In some it is made of 
wood, glass, butter, etc. 


“Attempts were also made,” says Schreber, “to falsify my 
mental individuality in all sorts of ways.” He was put into an 
inferior body, had to share his skull with other souls, acquired 
a profusion of heads. Flechsig’s and Weber's souls insinuated 
themselves into his body. The inside of his skull was even 
lined with a foreign membrane so that he should forget who he 
was. Innumerable tortures were inflicted: the compression-of- 
the-chest miracle (which Schatzman and others have linked 
with the wearing of the Geradehalter|, the head-compression 
machine, the stealing of his stomach, the invasion of the lung- 
worm. He was not allowed to sit, lie, or stand: “Rays did not 
seem to appreciate at all that a human being who actually ex- 
ists must be somewhere.” 

At another time, he says, poison was injected into him— 
even though the voices had told him that if he must be for- 
saken, he should be forsaken with a pure body. Sometimes the 
voices said things that sound as if they came from Schreber 
pére: “Do not think about certain parts of your body”; “A job 


xX 


Introduction 


started must be finished.” Sometimes, as when Virginia Woolf 
heard the birds outside speaking in Greek, the voices put 
themselves into birds who called out “Are you not ashamed?” 
when he fed them. 

Freud in his paper on Schreber did not investigate the 
mystery of “voices”: how it is that speech, presumably speech 
from the patient's mind, appears so forcibly to come from out- 
side. Along with Socrates and Joan of Arc, Freud had in fact 
experienced this himself. He describes it in an early paper 
on aphasia: 


I remember having twice been in danger of my life, and 
each time the awareness of the danger occurred to me 
quite suddenly. On both occasions I felt "this was the 
end,” and while otherwise my inner language proceeded 
with only indistinct sound images and slight lip move- 
ments, in these situations of danger I heard the words as 
if somebody was shouting them into my ear, and at the 
same time I saw them as if they were printed on a piece 
of paper floating in the air. 


There is a kind of awesome literary charge in the sheer fer- 
tility of the mad imagination. When the rays said that Schreber 
was to be reincarnated, it was to be as, first, a “Hyperborean 
woman,” then a “Jesuit Novice in Ossegg,” then a “Burgomaster 
of Klattau,” then “an Alsatian girl who had to defend her 
honor against a victorious French officer,” and finally “a Mon- 
golian Prince.” The whole cast of a surrealist play immediately 
springs into being. If there was in fact a compensation for poor 
Schreber in his sufferings, it was that the mind freed from rea- 
son is full of pictures. He speaks of the joy of “picturing’”— 


It has truly often been a consolation and comfort in the 
unending monotony of my dreary life, in the mental 


Introduction 


tortures I suffered from the nonsensical twaddle of 
voices. What a joy to be able to picture again in my 
mind’s eye recollections of journeys and landscapes, 
sometimes—when the rays behave favorably—with sur- 
prising faithfulness and true color. 


Mountains, people, entire operas were called up at will. His de- 
liberate picturing became a weapon against the involuntary 
hallucinations: ‘‘Seeing pictures purifies rays... they then en- 
ter into me without their usual destructive force. For this rea- 
son attempts are regularly made by counter-miracles to blot 
out what I have ‘pictured’, but I am usually victorious. .. .” 

Other kinds of imaginative work figured in the return to a 
precarious sanity that enabled Schreber to gain his release. 
First among these was playing the piano. One was put into his 
room for his sole use; his feelings on seeing it he expresses by a 
quotation from Tannhdéuser: “I could only remember that I 
had lost all hope of ever greeting you again or ever raising my 
eyes to you.” He began to remember how much he had forgot- 
ten. Music, having its own recollected laws, also defeated the 
rays: “During piano-playing the nonsensical twaddle of the 
voices which talk to me is drowned. ... Every attempt at ‘rep- 
resenting’ me by the ‘creation of a false feeling’ and suchlike is 
doomed to end in failure because of the real feeling one can put 
into piano playing.” Playing an aria from The Magic Flute— 
"Oh, I feel it, it has vanished, gone for ever”—he found music 
embodying truths that he recognized from afar. Other mitiga- 
tions of his forsakenness—seeing a children’s procession in 
the street, getting a letter from a relative with an identifiable 
stamp on—began to win him round to the idea that the human 
race still existed. He drowned the voices by learning pieces of 
poetry by heart; he played chess with other patients. What re- 
mains missing up to the end is feeling itself: no tears are 
recorded. 


Urs a! 
xxii 
S| 


Introduction 


Though we know much—much that is all too grim—about 
Paul Schreber’s father, we know too little about the women in 
his life. From family testimony it seems that his mother was a 
strong matriarch, indeed must have been when her husband 
withdrew into his long depression. In spite of his father’s 
legacy of manly exhortations, she could have been the stronger 
figure for the son to identify with. Perhaps a suppressed femi- 
ninity in Moritz had to be acted out by his son; perhaps the son 
had to throw out an unreal masculine ethos clamped on him 
like the Geradehalter. It is an irony, in any case, that the com- 
manding Moritz Schreber is now remembered for being the 
father of a madman. 

Too little is also known about Paul Scbreber’s wife Sabine. 
The chapter that was originally removed from the Memoirs for 
discretion’s sake might have had many relevant secrets in it. 
She is known to have been close to her influential father, to 
have admired Flechsig and kept a photograph of him on her 
desk, to have consented to her husband's forced removal to a 
public asylum, and to have been far from eager to have him 
home. All could have been good cause for Schreber’s anguish 
and protest. The couple’s adopted daughter Fridoline told an 
interviewer in her old age that her adoptive father was “more 
of a mother to me than my mother”; she preferred him, be- 
cause he was "loving, just and kind.” There is some mystery 
about Fridoline’s adoption and it has even been suggested 
that she was Sabine’s illegitimate daughter, but there is no 
proof. There may have been further hidden dramas within the 
Schreber family. 

The Memoirs will no doubt go on and on being written 
about. There is no one else who has been as mad, as vividly 
hallucinated as Schreber was, who at the same time has de- 
scribed with such detail and lucidity what he experienced. In 
following Schreber’s testimony on what patterns the mind 
breaks up into when it goes wrong, it is as though we are also 


Cc 1) 
xxiii 
| te are) 


Introduction 


seeing a film reversed, one that records the putting-together of 
reality from infancy onwards. Step by step, the ordinary grow- 
ing child puts together time and space and identity. Schreber 
deconstructs them. 


—ROSEMARY DINNAGE 


Iou asl 
xxiv 
tL 4 


MEMOIRS OF 
MY NERVOUS 


ILLNESS 





Denkwiirdigksiten 


Uervenkranken 


nebft MWachtragen 
und einem Wuheng itber die Frage: 
»Mnter welchen Voraussetzungen darf eine fiir geistes- 


krank erachtete Person gegen ihren erklacten Willen 
in einer Xeilanstalt festgehalten werden ?“ 


von 


Dr. jur. Daniel Paul Schreber, 


Senareprajident beim Lgl. Cherlanhesgerigt Drezden a, TV. 


= 4 


Déewald Mige in Lei gig. 
1903. 


PREFACE 


| STARTED THIS work without having publication in 
mind. The idea only occurred to me as I progressed with it; 
however, I did not conceal from myself doubts which seemed 
to stand in the way of publication: mainly consideration for 
certain persons still living. Yet I believe that expert examina- 
tion of my body and observation of my personal fate during my 
lifetime would be of value both for science and the knowledge 
of religious truths. In the face of such considerations all per- 
sonal issues must recede. 

Of the whole work the following were written: 

The Memoirs themselves (Chapters 1-22) in the period 
February to September 1900. 

Postscripts 1-8 in the period October 1900 to June 1901. 

Postscripts second series at the end of 1902. 

The outward circumstances of my life have materially 
changed since the early beginnings of this work. While at the 
beginning I was living in almost prison-like isolation, sepa- 
rated from contact with educated people, excluded even from 


MEMOIRS OF MY NERVOUS ILENESS 


the family table of the Director (to which so-called boarders of 
the Asylum were admitted), never able to get outside the walls 
of the Asylum, etc., I have gradually been granted increasing 
freedom of movement, and contact with educated people has 
been made increasingly possible. Finally I was completely suc- 
cessful in winning the proceedings against my tutelage (albeit 
in the Second Instance) as mentioned in Chapter 20, inasmuch 
as the decree of 13th March 1900 placing me under tutelage is- 
sued by the District Court, Dresden, was rescinded by the final 
judgment of the Superior Country Court, Dresden, of 14th July 
1902. My legal capacity was thereby acknowledged and free 
disposition of my properties restored to me. With regard to my 
stay in the Asylum, for months I have been in possession of a 
written declaration from the Asylum Authorities that there 
was now no opposition in principle to my discharge; I am plan- 
ning therefore to return to my house and home probably early 
next year. 

All these changes have afforded me the opportunity of con- 
siderably widening the range of my personal observations. 
Accordingly some of my earlier opinions need revision: in par- 
ticular I can no longer doubt that the so-called “play-with- 
human-beings” (the effect of miracles) is limited to myself and 
to whatever constitutes my immediate environment at the 
time. I might perhaps have formulated some passages of my 
Memoirs differently now. Nevertheless I haveleft them mainly 
in the form in which they were written originally. To change 
certain points now would only prejudice the freshness of the 
original descriptions. It is also in my opinion of little im- 
portance whether, in view of the relationship contrary to the 
Order of the World which arose between God and myself, ideas 
which I formed at the time were more or less faulty. A more 
general interest can in any case be claimed only for those con- 
clusions which I arrived at in consequence of my impressions 
and experiences about the Jasting conditions, about the 


Preface 


essence and attributes of God, the immortality of the soul, etc. 
In this respect I have no reason whatever, even after my subse- 
quent personal experiences, to make the very slightest alter- 
ation in the basic ideas set out particularly in chapters 1, 2, 18 
and 19 of the Memoirs. 


SONNENSTEIN ASYLUM, NEAR PIRNA, 
DECEMBER 1902. 


—THE AUTHOR 





OPEN LETTER 
TO PROFESSOR FLECHSIG 


Dear Professor, 

I take the liberty of enclosing a copy of “Memoirs of a 
Patient Suffering from a Nervous Illness,” which I have writ- 
ten, and beg you to examine it in a kindly spirit. 

You will find your name mentioned frequently, particularly 
in the first chapter, partly in connection with circumstances 
which might be painful to you. I very much regret this but un- 
fortunately cannot make any changes without from the very 
outset precluding making myself understood. In any case it is 
far from me to attack your honor, as indeed J do not harbor 
any personal grievance against any person. My aim is solely to 
further knowledge of truth in a vital field, that of religion. 

I am absolutely certain that in this regard I command expe- 
riences which—when generally acknowledged as valid—will 
act fruitfully to the highest possible degree among the rest of 
mankind. Equally I have no doubt that your name plays an 
essential role in the genetic development of the circumstances 
in question, in that certain nerves taken from your nervous 


MEMOIRS OF MY NERVOUS ILLNESS 


system became “tested souls” in the sense described in 
Chapter 1 of the “Memoirs,” and in this capacity achieved 
supernatural power by means of which they have for years 
exerted a damaging influence on me and still do to this day. 
You like other people may be inclined at first to see nothing 
but a pathological offspring of my imagination in this; but I 
have an almost overwhelming amount of proof of its correct- 
ness, details of which you will find in the content of my 
“Memoirs.” I still feel daily and hourly the damaging influence 
of the miracles of those “tested souls”; the voices that speak to 
me even now shout your name again and again at me hundreds 
of times every day in this context, in particular as the instiga- 
tor of those injuries; and this despite the fact that the personal 
relations which existed between us for some time have long 
since receded into the background for me; I could hardly there- 
fore have any reason to keep on thinking of you, especially 
with any sense of grievance. 

For years I have pondered how to reconcile these facts with 
my respect for your person, whose integrity and moral worth 
I have not the least right to doubt. Only quite recently how- 
ever, just before the publication of my book, I had a new idea 
which might possibly lead to the correct solution of the prob- 
lem. As remarked at the end of Chapter 4 and the beginning of 
Chapter 5 of the “Memoirs,” I have not the least doubt that 
the first impetus to what my doctors always considered mere 
“hallucinations” but which to me signified communication 
with supernatural powers, consisted of influences on my ner- 
vous system emanating from your nervous system. How could 
this be explained? I think it is possible that you—at first as I 
am quite prepared to believe only for therapeutic purposes— 
carried on some hypnotic, suggestive, or whatever else one 
could call it, contact with my nerves, even while we were sep- 
arated in space. During this contact you might suddenly have 
realized that other voices were speaking to me as well, point- 





Open letter to Professor Flechsig 


ing to a supernatural origin. Following this surprising realiza- 
tion you might have continued this contact with me for a time 
out of scientific interest, until you yourself felt as it were un- 
easy about it, and therefore decided to break it off. But it is pos- 
sible that in this process a part of your own nerves—probably 
unknown to yourself—was removed from your body, a process 
explicable only in a supernatural manner, and ascended to 
heaven as a “tested soul” and there achieved some supernatu- 
ral power. This “tested soul” still endowed with human faults 
like all impure souls—in accordance with the character of 
souls which I have come to know with certainty—then simply 
allowed itself to be driven by the impulse of ruthless self- 
determination and lust for power, without any restraint by 
something comparable to the moral will power of man, exactly 
in the same way as another “tested soul,” that of von W., as 
recorded in my “Memoirs.” It is possible therefore that all 
those things which in earlier years I erroneously thought I had 
to blame you for—particularly the definite damaging effects on 
my body—are to be blamed only on that “tested soul.” There 
would then be no need to cast any shadow upon your person 
and only the mild reproach would perhaps remain that you, 
like so many doctors, could not completely resist the tempta- 
tion of using a patient in your care as an object for scientific 
experiments apart from the real purpose of cure, when by 
chance matters of the highest scientific interest arose. One 
might even raise the question whether perhaps all the talk of 
voices about somebody having committed soul murder can be 
explained by the souls (rays) deeming it impermissible that a 
person’s nervous system should be influenced by another’s to 
the extent of imprisoning his will power, such as occurs during 
hypnosis; in order to stress forcefully that this was a malprac- 
tice it was called “soul murder,” the souls for lack of a better 
term, using a term already in current usage, and because of 
their innate tendency to express themselves hyperbolically. 





MEMOIRS OF MY NERVOUS ILLNESS 


I need hardly mention of what immeasurable importance it 
would be if you could in any way confirm the surmises I have 
sketched above, all the more if they could be substantiated in 
recollections of earlier years retained in your memory. The rest 
of my thesis would thereby gain universal credence and would 
immediately be regarded as a serious scientific problem to be 
investigated in every possible way. 

I beg you therefore, my dear Sir—I might almost say: I 
implore you—to state without reservation: 


(1) Whether during my stay in your Asylum you maintained 
a hypnotic or similar contact with me in such a way that even 
when separated in space, you exerted an influence on my nerv- 
ous system; 

(2) Whether you thus witnessed in any way communica- 
tions from voices originating elsewhere, indicating supernatu- 
ral origin; finally 

(3) Whether during my time in your Asylum you your- 
self also received visions or vision-like impressions par- 
ticularly in dreams, which dealt amongst others with the 
almighty power of God and human freedom of will, unman- 
ning, loss of states of Blessedness, my relations and my friends, 
as well as yours, particularly Daniel Furchtegott Flechsig 
named in Chapter 6, and many other matters mentioned in my 
“Memoirs.” 


I hasten to add that from the numerous communications I re- 
ceived from the voices that talked to me at that time, I have 
the most weighty indications that you yourself had similar 
visions. 

In appealing to your scientific interest I may be permitted 
to trust that you will have the courage of truth, even if you had 
to admit some trifle which could never seriously affect your 
prestige or authority in the eyes of any sensible person. 


10 





Open letter to Professor Flechsig 


In case you want to send me a written communication 
you may rest assured that I would publish it only with your 
permission and in a form which you yourself may choose. 

In view of the wide interest which the content of this letter 
may claim, I have thought fit to have it printed in the form of 
an “open letter” prefacing my “Memoirs.” 


DRESDEN, MARCH 1903. 
Yours sincerely, 


Dr. Schreber, Senatsprasident 
(retired). 





MEMOIRS 








INTRODUCTION 


| HAVE DECIDED to apply for my release from the 
Asylum in the near future in order to live once again among 
civilized people and at home with my wife. It is therefore 
necessary to give those persons who will then constitute the 
circle of my acquaintances, an approximate idea at least of my 
religious conceptions, so that they may have some understand- 
ing of the necessity which forces me to various oddities of be- 
havior, even if they do not fully understand these apparent 
oddities.” 

This is the purpose of this manuscript; in it I shall try 
to give an at least partly comprehensible exposition of 








* Prefatory Remark. 

During the course of writing the present essay it occurred to me that it could per- 
haps be of interest to a wider circle. Nevertheless I have left the preamble because 
it was my original motive to acquaint my wife with my personal experiences and 
religious ideas. This explains also why I have frequently thought it right to give 
circuitous explanations for facts already known, to translate foreign words, etc., 
which would really have been unnecessary for the scientifically trained reader. 


15 





MEMOIRS 


supernatural matters, knowledge of which has been revealed 
to me for almost six years. I cannot of course count upon being 
fully understood because things are dealt with which cannot 
be expressed in human language; they exceed human under- 
standing. Nor can I maintain that everything is irrefutably cer- 
tain even for me: much remains only presumption and 
probability. After all I too am only a human being and there- 
fore limited by the confines of human understanding; but one 
thing I am certain of, namely that I have come infinitely closer 
to the truth than human beings who have not received divine 
revelation. 

To make myself at least somewhat comprehensible I shall 
have to speak much in images and similes, which may at 
times perhaps be only approximately correct; for the only way 
a human being can make supernatural matters, which in their 
essence must always remain incomprehensible, understand- 
able to a certain degree is by comparing them with known 
facts of human experience. Where intellectual understanding 
ends, the domain of belief begins; man must reconcile himself 
to the fact that things exist which are true although he cannot 
understand them. 

An obvious example is that the concept of eternity is be- 
yond man’s grasp. Man cannot really understand that some- 
thing can exist which has neither beginning nor end, that there 
can be a cause which cannot itself be traced to a previous 
cause. And yet eternity is one of God’s attributes, which with 
all religiously minded people I feel I must accept. Man will al- 
ways be inclined to ask: “If God created the world, how then 
did God Himself come to be?” This question will for ever re- 
main unanswered. The same applies to the concept of divine 
creation. Man can always only imagine that new matter is cre- 
ated through the influence of forces on matter already in exis- 
tence, and yet I believe—and I hope to prove in what follows 
by means of definite examples—that divine creation is a cre- 


le 





Introduction 


ation out of the void. Even in the dogmas of our positive reli- 
gion there are certain matters which escape full understanding 
by the intellect. The Christian teaching that Jesus Christ was 
the Son of God can be meant only in a mystical sense which 
but approximates the human sense of these words, because no- 
body would maintain that God, as a Being endowed with hu- 
man sexual organs, had intercourse with the woman from 
whose womb Jesus Christ came forth. The same applies to the 
doctrine of the Trinity, the Resurrection of the Flesh, and other 
Christian dogmas. By this I do not in any way wish to imply 
that I acknowledge as true all Christian dogmas in the sense 
of our orthodox theology. On the contrary, I have good reason 
to think that some of them are definitely untrue or true only 
to a very limited extent. This applies, for instance, to the 
Resurrection of the Flesh, which could only lay claim to being 
relatively and temporarily true in the form of transmigration 
of souls (not representing the ultimate goal of the process}, and 
also to eternal damnation to which some people are supposed 
to have succumbed. The concept of eternal damnation—which 
will always remain abhorrent to human feeling notwithstand- 
ing the exposition, based on what I consider sophisms by 
which Luthardt for instance, tried to make it acceptable in his 
Apologies—does not correspond to the truth, as indeed the 
whole (human) notion of punishment—as an expeditious 
weapon for attaining certain purposes within human society— 
must in the main be eliminated from our ideas of the life be- 
yond. This, however, can only be examined more closely later.' 

Before I proceed with the account of how, owing to my 
illness, I entered into peculiar relations with God—which I 





1. On the other hand, on the basis of what I have myself experienced, I am able to 
give a more detailed explanation of some Christian dogmas and how such things 
can come about through divine miracles. Something like the conception of Jesus 
Christ by an Immaculate Virgin—i.e. one who never had intercourse with a 


17 
el 





MEMOJRS 


hasten to add were in themselves contrary to the Order of the 
World—I must begin with a few remarks about the nature of 
God and of the human soul; these can for the time being only 
be put up as axioms—tenets not requiring proof—and their 
proof as far as is at all possible can only be attempted later in 


the book. 





man—happened in my own body. Twice at different times {while I was still in 
Flechsig’s Asylum) I had a female genital organ, although a poorly developed one, 
and in my body felt quickening like the first signs of life of a human embryo: by a 
divine miracle God‘s nerves corresponding to male seed had been thrown into my 
body; in other words fertilization had occurred. Further, I have reached a fairly 
clear idea of how the Resurrection of Jesus Christ may have come about; during 
the latter part of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum and the beginning of my stay here, 
I have witnessed not once but hundreds of times how human shapes were set 
down for a short time by divine miracles only to be dissolved again or vanish. The 
voices talking to me designated these visions the so-called “fleeting-improvised- 
men’—some were even persons long ago deceased, as for instance Dr. Rudolph J., 
whom [ had seen in Pierson’s Asylum—so-called—in Coswig; there were others 
also, who had apparently passed through a transmigration of souls, as for instance 
the Senior Public Prosecutor B., Counsel of the Country Court Drs. N. and W., the 
Privy Councillor Dr. W., the lawyer W., my father-in-law and others; all of them 
were leading a so-called dream life, ie. they did not give the impression of being 
capable of holding a sensible conversation, just as I myself was at that time also 
little inclined to talk, mainly because I thought that I was faced not by real people 
but by miraculously created puppets. On the basis of these experiences I am in- 
clined to think that Jesus Christ also, who as a real human being died a real death, 
was subsequently by divine miracle “set down” anew for a short time as a “fleet- 
ing-improvised-man,” in order to strengthen the faith of his followers and thereby 
securely establish the idea of immortality among mankind, but he subsequently 
succumbed to the natural dissolution of the “fleeting-improvised-men,” so that it 
is not impossible according to what will be said below that his nerves entered into 
the state of eternal Blessedness. From this conception it follows that the Dogma 
of the Ascension of Christ is a mere fable by which His disciples tried to explain 
the fact that after His death they repeatedly saw His person in the flesh amongst 
them. 





God and Immortality 


THE HUMAN SOUL is contained in the nerves of the 
body; about their physical nature I, as a layman, cannot say 
more than that they are extraordinarily delicate structures— 
comparable to the finest filaments—and that the total mental 
life of a human being rests on their excitability by external im- 
pressions. Vibrations are thereby caused in the nerves which 
produce the sensations of pleasure and pain in a manner which 
cannot be further explained; they are able to retain the mem- 
ory of impressions received (the human memory) and have 
also the power of moving the muscles of the body which they 
inhabit into any manifest activity by exertion of their will 
power. From the most tender beginnings (as the fruit of the 
womb—as a child’s soul} they develop to a complex system 
which embraces the most widespread regions of human know!l- 
edge (the soul of mature man). Part of the nerves is adapted 
solely for receiving sensory impressions (nerves of sight, hear- 
ing, taste and voluptuousness, etc., which are therefore only 
capable of the sensation of light, sound, heat and cold, of the 





MEMOIRS 


feeling of hunger, voluptuousness and pain, etc.); other nerves 
(the nerves of intellect) receive and retain mental impressions 
and as the organs of will, give to the whole human organism 
the impulse to manifest those of its powers designed to act on 
the outside world. Circumstances seem to be such that every 
single nerve of intellect represents the total mental individu- 
ality of a human being, that the sum total of recollections is 
as it were inscribed on each single nerve of intellect;’ the 
greater or lesser number of nerves of intellect only influences 
the length of time for which recollections can be retained. 
While man is alive he is body and soul together; the nerves 
(the soul of man} are nourished and kept in living motion by 
the body whose function is essentially similar to that of the 
higher animals. Should the body lose its vitality then the state 
of unconsciousness, which we call death and which is pre- 
saged in sleep, supervenes for the nerves. This, however, does 
not imply that the soul is really extinguished; rather the im- 
pressions received remain attached to the nerves. The soul, as 
it were, only goes into hibernation as some lower animals do 
and can be re-awakened to a new life in a manner to be de- 
scribed below. 

God to start with is only nerve, not body, and akin therefore 
to the human soul. But unlike the human body, where nerves 


2. If this assumption is correct, then the problem of heredity and variability is 
also solved, i.e. the fact that children resemble their parents and grandparents in 
some ways and deviate from them in others. The male seed contains a paternal 
nerve and combines with a nerve taken from the mother’s body to form a newly 
created entity. This new entity—the child to be—thus re-creates anew the father 
and the mother, perhaps more the former or the latter, in turn receives new im- 
pressions in its lifetime and then transmits this newly acquired individuality to 
its descendents. 

The idea of the existence of a particular nerve of determination representing the 
mental unity of a person, which I understand forms the basis of du Prel’s work of 
the same name, would accordingly be without substance. 


20 





God and Immortality 


are present only in limited numbers, the nerves of God are infi- 
nite and eternal. They possess the same qualities as human 
nerves but in a degree surpassing all human understanding. 
They have in particular the faculty of transforming themselves 
into all things of the created world; in this capacity they are 
called rays; and herein lies the essence of divine creation. An 
intimate relation exists between God and the starry sky. I dare 
not decide whether one can simply say that God and the heav- 
enly bodies are one and the same, or whether one has to think 
of the totality of God’s nerves as being above and behind the 
stars, so that the stars themselves and particularly our sun 
would only represent stations, through which God's miracu- 
lous creative power travels to our earth (and perhaps to other 
inhabitated planets). 

Equally I dare not say whether the celestial bodies them- 
selves (fixed stars, planets, etc.) were created by God, or 
whether divine creation is limited to the organic world; in 
which case there would be room for the Nebular Hypothesis of 
Kant-Laplace side by side with the existence of a living God 
whose existence has become absolute certainty for me. Per- 
haps the full truth lies (by way of a fourth dimension} in a 
combination or resultant of both trends of thought impossible 
for man to grasp. In any case the light and warmth-giving 
power of the sun, which makes her the origin of all organic life 
on earth, is only to be regarded as an indirect manifestation of 
the living God; hence the veneration of the sun as divine by so 
many peoples since antiquity contains a highly important core 
of truth even if it does not embrace the whole truth. 

The teaching of present-day astronomy about the move- 
ments, the distances and the physical properties of the celes- 
tial bodies, etc., may in the main be correct. My own personal 





3. Such things are also known to our poets “Far above the starry sky, surely 
dwells a kindly father,” etc. 


21 





MEMOIRS 


experiences leave me in doubt however whether even the as- 
tronomy of today has grasped the whole truth about the light- 
and warmth-giving power of the stars and particularly of our 
sun; perhaps one has to consider her directly or indirectly only 
as that part of God’s miraculous creative power which is di- 
rected to the earth. As proof of this statement I will at present 
only mention the fact that the sun has for years spoken with 
me in human words and thereby reveals herself as a living be- 
ing or as the organ of a still higher being behind her. God also 
regulates the weather; as a rule this is done automatically, so 
to speak, by the greater or lesser amount of heat emanating 
from the sun, but He can regulate it in certain ways in pursuit 
of His own purposes. For instance I have received fairly defi- 
nite indications that the severe winter of 1870-71 was decided 
on by God in order to turn the fortunes of war in favor of the 
Germans; and the proud words on the destruction of Phillip II’s 
Spanish Armada in the year 1588 “Deus afflavit et dissipati 
sunt” (God blew the wind and they were scattered) most prob- 
ably also contains a historical truth. In this connection I refer 
to the sun only as that instrument of God’s will power which 
lies nearest to the earth; in reality the condition of the weather 
is affected by the sum total of the other stars as well. Winds or 
storms in particular arise when God moves further away from 
the earth. In the circumstances contrary to the Order of the 
World which have now arisen this relation has changed—and I 
wish to mention this at the outset—the weather is now to a 
certain extent dependent on my actions and thoughts; as soon 
as I indulge in thinking nothing, or in other words stop an ac- 
tivity which proves the existence of the human mind such as 
playing chess in the garden the wind arises at once. To any- 
body who is inclined to doubt such a fantastic statement, I 
could almost daily give the opportunity of convincing him of 
its correctness, as in fact I have recently convinced various 
people about the so-called attacks of bellowing (the doctor, my 


22 





God and Immortality 


wife, my sister, etc.). The reason for this is simply that as soon 
as I indulge in thinking nothing God, presuming that I am de- 
mented, thinks he can withdraw from me. 

Through the light emanating from the sun and the other 
stars, God is able to perceive (man would say: to see} every- 
thing that happens on earth and possibly on other inhabited 
planets; in this sense one can speak figuratively of the sun and 
light of the stars as the eye of God. All He sees He enjoys as 
the fruits of His creative power, much as a human being is 
pleased with what he has created with his hands or with his 
mind. Yet things were so ordered—up to the crisis to be de- 
scribed later—that by and large God left the world which He 
had created and the organic life upon it (plants, animals, hu- 
man beings} to their own devices and only provided continu- 
ous warmth of the sun to enable them to maintain themselves 
and reproduce, etc. As a rule God did not interfere directly in 
the fate of peoples or individuals—I call this the state of affairs 
in accordance with the Order of the World. It could however 
occur now and then as an exception, but neither did nor could 
happen too frequently because to draw close to living mankind 
was connected with certain dangers even for God Himself—for 
reasons developed further below. For instance a particularly 
fervent prayer might in a special case induce God to give help 
by intervening with a miracle* or to shape the fate of whole 
nations (in war, etc.) by means of miracles. He was also able to 
get into contact (to form “nerve-contact with them” as the 
voices that speak to me call this process) with highly gifted 
people (poets, etc.), in order to bless them (particularly in 
dreams) with some fertilizing thoughts and ideas about the 





4. | have on innumerable occasions experienced in my own body and continue to 
do so daily even now that God has, for instance, the power to remove from the hu- 


man body any germ of illness by sending forth a few pure rays. 





MEMOIRS 


beyond. But such “nerve-contact” was not allowed to become 
the rule, as already mentioned, because for reasons which can- 
not be further elucidated, the nerves of living human beings 
particularly when in a state of high-grade excitation, have 
such power of attraction for the nerves of God that He would 
not be able to free Himself from them again, and would thus 
endanger His own existence. 

Regular contact between God and human souls occurred 
in the Order of the World only after death. There was no dan- 
ger for God in approaching corpses in order to draw their 
nerves, in which self-awareness was not extinct but quiescent, 
out of their bodies and up to Himself by the power of the rays, 
thereby awakening them to new heavenly life; self-awareness 
returned through the influence of the rays. The new life be- 
yond is the state of Blessedness to which the human soul 
could be raised. But this did not occur without prior puri- 
fication and sifting of the human nerves which required, ac- 
cording to the variable condition of the respective human 
souls, a shorter or longer time of preparation, and perhaps 
even certain intermediate stages. Only pure human nerves 
were of use to God—or if one prefers, in heaven—because it 
was their destiny to be attached to God Himself and ulti- 
mately to become in a sense part of Him as “forecourts of 





5. (Added November 1902.) The idea of a force of attraction emanating from indi- 
vidual human bodies or—in my case—from one single human body, acting at such 
vast distances, must in itself appear absurd if one thinks in terms of natural forces 
acting purely mechanically. Nevertheless, that an attracting force is at work is for 
me a fact beyond dispute. This phenomenon will perhaps be somewhat compre- 
hensible and brought nearer human understanding if one remembers that the rays 
are living beings and therefore the power of attraction is not purely a mechani- 
cally acting force, but something like a psychological motive power: the rays too 
find that “attractive” which is of interest to them. The relationship therefore ap- 
pears to be similar to that expressed by Goethe in his “Fisherman”: “partly she 
dragged him down, partly he sank.” 


24 





God and Immortality 


heaven.”* The nerves of morally depraved men are blackened; 
morally pure men have white nerves; the higher a man’s moral 
standard in life, the more his nerves become completely white 
or pure, an intrinsic property of God’s nerves. A greater part of 
the nerves of morally depraved men is probably useless; this 
determines the various grades of states of Blessedness to 
which a human being can attain, and probably also the length 
of time for which self-awareness in the life beyond can be 
maintained. Nerves probably always have to undergo purifica- 
tion first, because it would be very difficult to find a human 
being completely free from sin, that is to say one whose nerves 
were never defiled by immoral behavior in his earlier life. Not 
even I can give an exact description of the process of purifica- 
tion; but I have received several valuable indications about it. 
It appears that the process of purification was connected witha 
feeling of an unpleasant task’ for the souls, or perhaps of an un- 
comfortable sojourn in the underworld, which was necessary 
to purify them gradually. 

It may be justifiable to designate this in a sense as “punish- 
ment”; but it has to be distinguished from the human idea 
of punishment in that its purpose is not to do harm, but to 
provide a necessary preliminary for purification. The ideas of 
hell, hellfire, etc., current in most religions can be explained in 





6. I did not invent the expression “forecourts of heaven,” but like all other expres- 
sions which are in inverted commas in this essay {for instance “fleeting- 
improvised-men,” “dream life,” etc.), it only repeats the words which the voices 
that speak to me always applied to the processes concerned. These are expressions 
which would never have occurred to me, which I have never heard from human 
beings; they are in part of a scientific, and particularly medical nature, and I do 
not even know whether they are in current use in the human science concerned. I 
will draw attention to this extraordinary state of affairs again in some particularly 
noteworthy instances. 


7. For instance, there was once talk of Flechsig’s soul having to perform “dray- 
man’s work.” 


25 





MEMOIRS 


this way, but must be qualified in part. The souls to be 
purified learnt during purification the language spoken by 
God Himself, the so-called “basic language,” a somewhat anti- 
quated but nevertheless powerful German, characterized par- 
ticularly by a wealth of euphemisms (for instance, reward in 
the reverse sense for punishment, poison for food, juice for 
venom, unholy for holy, etc. God Himself was called “concern- 
ing Him Who is and shall be’—meaning eternity—and was 
addressed as “Your Majesty's obedient servant”). Purification 
was called “testing”; souls which had not yet undergone the 
process of purification were not, as one would expect, called 
“"non-tested souls,” but the exact reverse, namely “tested 
souls,” in accordance with the tendency to use euphemisms. 
The souls still undergoing the process of purification were 
variously graded as “Satans,” “Devils,” “Assistant Devils,” 
“Senior Devils,” and “Basic Devils”; the latter expression par- 
ticularly seems to point to an abode in the underworld. The 
“Devils,” etc., when set down as “fleeting-improvised-men,” 
had a peculiar color (perhaps carrot-red) and a peculiar offen- 
sive odor, which I experienced a number of times in the so- 
called Pierson Asylum in Coswig (which I heard called the 
Devil's Kitchen). For instance 1 saw Mr. v. W. and a Mr. von O., 
whom we had met in the East Coast resort Warnemtinde, as 
Devils with peculiar red faces and red hands, and Mr. W. as a 
Senior Devil. 

I learnt that Judas Iscariot had been a Basic Devil for his be- 
trayal of Jesus Christ. But one must not imagine these Devils 
as powers inimical to God as in the ideas of the Christian 
religion, for almost without exception they had already be- 
come thoroughly God-fearing, although they were still under- 
going the process of purification. The above statement that 
God used the German language in the form of the so-called 
“basic language,” is not to be understood as though the state of 
Blessedness was reserved only for Germans. Nevertheless the 


26 





God and Immortality 


Germans were in modern times (possibly since the Refor- 
mation, perhaps ever since the migration of nations) God’s 
chosen people whose language God preferred to use. In this 
sense God's chosen peoples in history—as the most moral at 
a given time—were in order the old Jews, the old Persians 
(these in an outstanding degree, about whom more will be 
said below), the “Greco-Romans” (perhaps in ancient Greece 
and Rome, perhaps also as the “Franks” at the time of the 
Crusades} and lastly the Germans. God readily understood the 
languages of all nations by contact with their nerves.* 

The transmigration of souls also seems to have served 
the purpose of purifying human souls and was widespread, as 
a number of experiences lead me to believe. In this process 
the human souls concerned were called to a new human life 
on other planets, presumably by being born in the manner 
of a human being, perhaps retaining some dim memory of 
their earlier existence. I dare not say anything more definite 
about this, nor whether the transmigration of souls served 
only the purposes of purification or other purposes as well 
(the populating of other planets?). From the voices that speak 
to me, as well as in other ways, I learnt of a number of 
persons to whom in after life a much lower station was allot- 
ted than they had held in the previous one, perhaps as a kind 
of punishment. 

Particularly noteworthy was the case of Mr. v. W., whose 
soul for a long time profoundly influenced my relation with 
God and therefore my personal fate, as Flechsig’s soul does 
to this very day.’ During my stay in Pierson’s Asylum (the 





8. In this way all the souls who are in contact with my nerves understand all lan- 
guages I understand, for the very reason that they partake of my thoughts, for in- 
stance they understand Greek when I read a Greek book, etc. 


9. At first glance it may appear contradictory that I mention people here as in 
footnote 1 above who are still among the living, and speak at the same time of a 


27 





MEMOIRS 


"Devil's Kitchen”), von W. held there the position of senior 
attendant—not as a real human being but, as I thought then 
and think still, as a “fleeting-improvised-man,” that is to say 
as a soul temporarily given human shape by divine miracle. He 
was said to have already led a second life as the “Insurance 
Agent Marx” on some other planet during the process of trans- 
migration of souls. 

Souls completely cleansed by the process of purification as- 
cended to heaven and so gained the state of Blessedness. This 
consisted of uninterrupted enjoyment combined with the con- 
templation of God. The idea of perpetual idleness is unbear- 
able for a human being, because man is accustomed to work 
and, as the proverb says, it is only work which makes life 
sweet for him. But one must remember that souls are different 
from human beings and therefore it is not permissible to gauge 
their feelings by human standards.” Souls’ greatest happiness 
lies in continual reveling in pleasure combined with recollec- 
tions of their human past. They were able to exchange their 


transmigration of souls which they are said to have undergone. This is in fact even 
for me ariddle which I can only partially solve, and which would be quite insolu- 
ble by purely human notions. Nevertheless several instances particularly that of 
von W.’s soul and Flechsig’s soul are established fact for me, because for years I 
have felt the direct influence of these souls on my body, and still feel daily and 
hourly Flechsig’s soul or possibly part of Flechsig’s soul. I will try to give a more 
detailed explanation of these matters below when I come to speak of the so-called 
“play-with-human-beings.” Here it suffices to point to the possibility of a parti- 
tion of souls which would make it possible for certain nerves of mind belonging to 
a person still living (which would, as mentioned above, retain the full knowledge 
of his personal identity if only for a short time} to play some different role when 


outside his body. 


10. Richard Wagner for instance, as if with some insight into these things, makes 
Tannhauser say in the ecstasy of love: “Alas your love overwhelmes me: perpetual 
enjoyment is only for Gods, I as a mortal am subject to change.” One finds many 
such almost prophetic visions in our poets which confirms my belief that they 
had received divine inspiration by way of nerve-contact (especially in dreams). 


28 





God and Immortality 


recollections and by means of divine rays—borrowed for this 
purpose, so to speak—obtain knowledge about the conditions 
of persons still living on earth in whom they were interested, 
their relatives, friends, etc., and probably even help raise them 
up after death to attain to the state of Blessedness. But the 
souls’ own happiness was not clouded by learning of their rela- 
tives’ unhappy state on earth. For although the souls could re- 
tain the memory of their own human past, they could not for 
any length of time retain new impressions which they received 
as souls. This natural tendency of souls to forget would soon 
have erased any new adverse impressions. There were grada- 
tions within the state of Blessedness according to the staying 
power which nerves concerned had achieved in their human 
life, and probably also according to the number of nerves 
which were deemed worthy of being raised to heaven. 

The male state of Blessedness was superior to the female 
state; the latter seems to have consisted mainly in an uninter- 
rupted feeling of voluptuousness. Further, the soul of a Goethe, 
a Bismarck, etc., is likely to have retained its self-consciousness 
{knowledge of its own identity) for centuries, while the soul of 
a child which died young, might only have preserved it for the 
same number of years as it had lived. It was granted to no hu- 
man soul to remain aware for all eternity of having been this 
or that human being. It was rather the ultimate destiny of all 
souls to merge with other souls, and integrate into higher 
entities, remaining aware only of being part of God ("fore- 
courts of heaven”). This shows that they did not perish—as far 
as this goes souls were granted eternal existence—it was a 
continued life but with a different awareness. Only a narrow- 
minded person would find this an imperfection in-the state of 
Blessedness—compared with personal immortality in the 
sense of the Christian religion. What purpose could it have 
served the soul to remember the name it once bore among 
men and its earlier personal relationships, when not only its 


29 





MEMOIRS 


children and grandchildren had long since gone to eternal rest, 
but numerous other generations had gone to their graves as 
well, and perhaps even the nation to which it once belonged 
had been struck off the roll of living nations. Thus while still 
in Flechsig’s Asylum I became acquainted with rays—that is 
to say complexes of blessed human souls merged into higher 
entities—belonging to the old Judaism ("Jehovah rays”), the 
old Persians (“Zoroaster rays”) and the old Germans {”Thor 
and Odin rays”) among which certainly not a single soul re- 
mained with any awareness of the name under which it had be- 
longed to one or other of these peoples thousands of years ago."! 

God Himself dwelt above the “forecourts of heaven”; He 
was also called the “posterior realms of God” in contradistinc- 
tion to these “anterior realms of God.” The posterior realms 
of God were (and still are) subject to a peculiar division, a 
lower God (Ariman) and upper God (Ormuzd) being distin- 
guished. I know nothing more about the further significance of 
this partition,” except that the lower God (Ariman) seems to 
have felt attracted to nations of originally brunette race (the 
Semites) and the upper God to nations of originally blond 
race (the Aryan peoples). It is significant that a hint of this di- 
vision is found in the religious notions of many peoples. 
Identical with Ormuzd are Balder of the Germans, Bielebog 
{the white God) or Swantewit of the Slavs, Poseidon of the 
Greeks and Neptune of the Romans; identical with Ariman are 


11. This exposition about the “forecourts of heaven” may give an indication of 
the eternal cycle of things which is the basis of the Order of the World. In creating 
something, God in a sense divests Himself of part of Himself or gives different 
form to part of His nerves. This apparent loss is restored when after hundreds or 
thousands of years the nerves of departed human beings who, in their lifetime had 
been nourished by other created things and had attained to the state of Blessed- 
ness, return to Him as the "forecourts of heaven.” 


12. Apart from what is said below concerning “unmanning.” 


30 





God and Immortality 


Wodan (Odin) of the Germans, Czernebog (the black God) of 
the Slavs, Zeus of the Greeks and Jupiter of the Romans. I first 
heard of the lower and the upper God as Ariman and Ormuzd 
from the voices that talk to me at the beginning of July 1894 
(perhaps at the end of my first week in this Asylum}; since 
then I have heard these names daily.’ This date coincided 
with the depletion of the anterior realms of God with which I 
had previously been in contact (perhaps from the middle of 
March 1894). 

The above picture of the nature of God and the continued 
existence of the human soul after death differs markedly in 
some respects from the Christian views on these matters. It 
seems to me that a comparison between the two can only favor 
the former. God was not omniscient and omnipresent in the 
sense that He continuously saw inside every individual living 
person, perceived every feeling of his nerves, that is to say at 
all times “tried his heart and reins.” But there was no need for 
this because after death the nerves of human beings with all 
the impressions they had received during life lay bare before 
God’s eye, so that an unfailingly just judgment could be 
reached as to whether they were worthy of being received into 
the realms of heaven. In any case it was always possible for 
God to get to know the inner person through nerve-contact, 
whenever the need arose. On the other hand the picture I have 
drawn lacks any of the features of severity, of purposeless cru- 
elty imprinted on some of the notions of the Christian and in a 





13. One of my main reasons for believing that the old Persians (naturally before 
their later decay) were pre-eminently the “chosen people of God,” in other words 
that they must have been a nation of quite remarkable moral virtue, was that the 
names of the corresponding Persian divinities had been retained for the lower and 
upper Gods. This belief is supported by the unusual strength which I noticed at 
one time in the “Zoroaster rays.” The name Ariman occurs by the way also in 
Lord Byron’s Manfred in connection with a soul murder. 


31 





MEMOIRS 


still greater degree on those of other religions. The whole 
Order of the World therefore appears as a “miraculous struc- 
ture,”"* the sublimity of which surpasses in my opinion all 
conceptions which in the course of history men and peoples 
have developed about their relation to God. 


14. Again an expression which I did not invent. I had spoken—in the thought—or 
nerve-language mentioned below—of miraculous organization whereupon the ex- 
pression “miraculous structure” was suggested to me from outside. 


32 





Crisis in God’s realms? 
Soul murder 


THIS “MIRACULOUS STRUCTURE” has recently 
suffered a rent, intimately connected with my personal fate. 
But it is impossible even for me to present the deeper connec- 
tions in a way which human understanding can fully grasp. My 
personal experiences enable me to lift the veil only partially; 
the rest is intuition and conjecture. I want to say by way of in- 
troduction that the leading roles in the genesis of this develop- 
ment, the first beginnings of which go back perhaps as far as 
the eighteenth century, were played on the one hand by the 
names of Flechsig and Schreber (probably not specifying any 
individual member of these families), and on the other by the 
concept of soul murder. 

To start with the latter: the idea is widespread in the folk- 
lore and poetry of all peoples that it is somehow possible to 
take possession of another person’s soul in order to prolong 
one’s life at another soul’s expense, or to secure some other 
advantages which outlast death. One has only to think for 
example of Goethe's Faust, Lord Byron’s Manfred, Weber's 


33 





MEMOIRS 


Frieschiitz, etc. Commonly, however, the main role is sup- 
posed to be played by the Devil, who entices a human being 
into selling his soul to him by means of a drop of blood, etc. 
for some worldly advantages; yet it is difficult to see what the 
Devil was to do with a soul so caught, if one is not to assume 
that torturing a soul as an end in itself gave the Devil special 
pleasure. 

Although the latter idea must be relegated to the realm of 
fable because the Devil as a power inimical to God does not 
exist at all according to the above, yet the wide dissemination 
of the legend motif of soul murder or soul theft gives food for 
thought; it is hardly likely that such ideas could have been 
formed by so many peoples without any basis in fact. The 
voices which talk to me have daily stressed ever since the 
beginning of my contact with God (mid-March 1894) the fact 
that the crisis that broke upon the realms of God was caused 
by somebody having committed soul murder, at first Flechsig 
was named as the instigator of soul murder but of recent times 
in an attempt to reverse the facts I myself have been “repre- 
sented” as the one who had committed soul murder. I therefore 
concluded that at one time something had happened between 
perhaps earlier generations of the Flechsig and Schreber fami- 
lies which amounted to soul murder; in the same way as 
through further developments, at the time when my nervous 
illness seemed almost incurable, I gained the conviction that 
soul murder had been attempted on me by somebody, albeit 
unsuccessfully. 

Lappetit vient en mangeant: it is therefore quite possible 
that after the first, more soul murders were committed on the 
souls of other people. I will leave open the question whether 
the first soul murder was really the moral responsibility of a 
human being; much of this remains mysterious. Originally 
perhaps it was a battle arising out of jealousy between souls al- 
ready departed from life. Both the Flechsigs and the Schrebers 


34 





Crisis in God’s realms?... 


belonged, it was said, to “the highest nobility of heaven”; the 
Schrebers had the particular title “Margraves of Tuscany and 
Tasmania,” according to the souls’ habit of adorning them- 
selves with high-sounding worldly titles from a kind of per- 
sonal vanity. Several names of both families are concerned: of 
the Flechsigs particularly Abraham Fiirchtegott Flechsig, Pro- 
fessor Paul Theodor Flechsig, and a Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig; 
the latter lived towards the end of the eighteenth century and 
was said to have been an “Assistant Devil” because of some- 
thing that had happened in the nature of a soul murder. 
However that may be, it is certain that I was in contact for 
some time with the nerves of Professor Paul Theodor Flechsig 
and of Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig (whether with the former 
also in his quality as a soul?) and had parts of their souls in 
my body. The soul of Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig vanished 
years ago (flitted away); part at least of Professor Paul Theodor 
Flechsig’s soul (i.e. a certain number of nerves originally 
with the consciousness of Professor Paul Theodor Flechsig’s 
identity, which however in the meantime had become very 
much reduced) still exists as a “tested soul” in heaven. The 
only knowledge I possess of the Flechsig family tree comes 
from what was said by the voices that talk to me; it would 
therefore be interesting to find out whether there had actually 
been a Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig and an Abraham Fiirch- 
tegott Flechsig among the forebears of the present Professor 
Flechsig. 

I presume that at one time a bearer of the name Flechsig— 
a human being carrying that name—succeeded in abusing 
nerve-contact granted him for the purpose of divine inspiration 
or some other reasons, in order to retain his hold on the divine 
rays. This is naturally only an hypothesis, but as in scientific 
research it has to be adhered to until a better explanation for 
the events under investigation is found. It seems very probable 
that contact with divine nerves was granted to a person who 


35 





MEMOIRS 


specialized in nervous illnesses, partly because he would be ex- 
pected to be a highly intellectual person, partly because every- 
thing concerning human nerves must be of particular interest 
to God, starting with His instinctive knowledge that an in- 
crease of nervousness among men could endanger His realms. 
Asylums for the mentally ill were therefore called in the basic 
language “God’s Nerve-Institutes.” If the above-mentioned 
Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig was the first to offend against the 
Order of the World by abusing contact with divine nerves, this 
would not be contradicted absolutely by the same man being 
called a Country Clergyman by the voices that talk to me, be- 
cause at the time when Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig was sup- 
posed to have lived—in the eighteenth century about the time 
of Frederick the Great'*—public Asylums for the insane were 
not yet in existence. 

One would therefore have to imagine that such a person, 
engaged in the practice of nervous diseases—having perhaps 
another profession besides—believed he had at some time 
seen miraculous visions in a dream and experienced miracu- 
lous things, which he felt an urge to investigate further, either 
out of ordinary human curiosity or keen scientific interest. He 
need not necessarily have known at the outset that he was in 
direct or indirect contact with God. He may have tried to 
recall these dream visions in subsequent nights and so have 
discovered that they really did return during sleep in the 


15. I gather this from a conversation which I had in a later contact with Daniel 
Fiirchtegott Flechsig’s nerves about Frederick the Great, whom he still remem- 
bered, as he was probably the most important living person of his time. On the 
other hand he knew nothing for instance of railways and it was therefore interest- 
ing for me to try to give a deceased soul by way of conversation kept up by nerve- 
contact an idea of what railways are and what great changes this invention has 


brought about in human communications. 


36 





Crisis in God’s realms?... 


same or perhaps slightly different form supplementing the 
earlier information. Naturally interest was heightened par- 
ticularly as the dreamer may have learnt that these communi- 
cations came from his own forebears, who lately had been out- 
stripped in some way or other by members of the Schreber 
family. He may then have tried to influence the nerves of 
his contemporaries by exerting his will power after the fashion 
of thought readers—such as Cumberland, etc.—and he may 
thus have found that this was possible to a certain extent. 
He may have resisted breaking off the contact into which 
divine rays had directly or indirectly entered with him, or 
made it dependent on conditions which could not be denied 
him, considering the souls’ natural weakness of character 
compared with that of living men, and in any case it was 
not thought possible to keep up permanent nerve-contact 
with a single human being. One can imagine that in this way 
something like a conspiracy may have arisen between such 
a person and the elements of the anterior realms of God to 
the detriment of the Schreber race, perhaps in the direction 
of denying them offspring or possibly only of denying them 
choice of those professions which would lead to closer re- 
lations with God such as that of a nerve specialist. In view 
of what was said above about the constitution of the 
realms of God and the (limited) omnipresence of God, such 
events need not necessarily have come to the knowledge of 
the posterior realms of God immediately. The conspirators— 
to retain this expression—perhaps succeeded in silencing 
possible scruples about allowing nerve-contact to be made 
with members of the Schreber family in an unguarded mo- 
ment such as occurs sometime in everybody’s life, in order 
also to convince the next higher instance of the hierarchy of 
God's realms that one Schreber soul more or less did not mat- 
ter in the face of danger threatening the very existence of the 


+ 
37 





MEMOIRS 


realms of God.'‘ In this way it may have come about that one 
did not immediately and resolutely oppose efforts inspired by 
ambition and lust for power, which could possibly lead to soul 
murder—if such a thing exist—that is to say to the surrender 
of a soul to another person perhaps for prolonging earthly life, 
for appropriating his mental powers, for attaining a kind of per- 
sonal immunity or some other advantage. On the other hand 
one may have underrated the danger even for the realms of 
God which this entailed. One felt so possessed of immense 
power that the possibility of one single human being ever be- 
coming a danger to God Himself was not taken into considera- 
tion. I have in fact not the least doubt from what I later learned 
and experienced of God’s miraculous power that God— 
provided that conditions in accordance with the Order of the 
World prevailed—would at any time have been able to annihi- 
late an embarrassing human being by sending him a fatal ill- 
ness or striking him with lightning. 

Perhaps one did not think it necessary to proceed immedi- 
ately with the most drastic measures against the presumed 
soul murderer, while his trespass consisted at first only of 
abuse of contact with divine nerves, and the eventuality of 
soul murder seemed remote, and if the person’s merit and 
moral conduct were such that it seemed unlikely that it would 
come to such an extremity. Apart from these hints I cannot en- 
large on the essential nature of soul murder or, so to speak, its 
technique. One might only add (the passage which follows is 
unfit for publication). I am sure that the person, whether it was 
the present Professor Flechsig or one of his forebears, who 


16. It is in this connection that during my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum I heard more 
than once the expression “Merely a Schreber soul” from the voices that talked to 
me. I have some reasons for thinking that contact was made with my nerves in- 
tentionally at moments when I might have appeared in a morally less favorable 
light; but it would lead too far afield to enlarge on this here. 


38 





Crisis in God’s realms?... 


must take the blame for being the original instigator of “soul 
murders,” must have had some notion of the supernatural 
matters which I have now come to know, although he cer- 
tainly did not penetrate to a deeper knowledge of God and the 
Order of the World. It is inconceivable that anybody who has 
won a profound faith in God and the certainty that in any case 
he is definitely guaranteed a state of Blessedness commensu- 
rate with the purity of his nerves should think of violating 
other people’s souls. It is equally unlikely that this should 
have happened in the case of a person who could be called reli- 
gious if only in the sense of our positive religion. I do not know 
what the present Professor Flechsig’s attitude to religious mat- 
ters was or is. Should he be or have been, a doubter, as so 
many others are today, he could not be blamed, least of all by 
myself who, I must confess, belonged to that category myself 
until divine revelation taught me better. 

Whoever has taken the trouble of reading the above atten- 
tively may spontaneously have thought that God Himself 
must have been or be in a precarious position, if the conduct 
of a single human being could endanger Him in any way and 
if even He Himself, if only in lower instances,’ could be en- 
ticed into a kind of conspiracy against human beings who are 





19. The expression “instances” (which is mine} as well as “hierarchy” above, 
seem to me to furnish an approximately accurate picture of the constitution of 
the realms of God. As long asI was in contact with the anterior realms of God (the 
forecourts of heaven] (March to early July 1894) every “leader of rays” (according 
to one expression J heard “anterior column leaders”) used to behave as if he were 
“God's omnipotence.” He knew that superior ones came behind him but not who 
these superior ones were, nor how high they went. The posterior realms of God 
{Ariman and Ormuzd) themselves appeared on the scene (beginning of July 1894) 
with such overwhelming brilliance at first that even v. W’s and Flechsig’s souls, 
which were at that time still “tested souls” could not help being impressed; they 
even temporarily gave up their customary sarcastic opposition to God’s omnipo- 
tence. I will explain later why these phenomena of light did not persist around 


39 





MEMOIRS 


fundamentally innocent. Such an objection may not be alto- 
gether unjustified but I must not omit to add that my own 
faith in the grandeur and sublimity of God and the Order of the 
World was not shaken. Not even God Himself is or was a being 
of such absolute perfection as most religions attribute to Him. 
The power of attraction, this even to me unfathomable law, ac- 
cording to which rays and nerves mutually attract one another, 
harbors a kernel of danger for the realms of God; this forms 
perhaps the basis of the Germanic saga of the Twilight of the 
Gods. Growing nervousness among mankind could and can in- 
crease these dangers considerably. God, as already mentioned, 
saw living human beings only from without; as a rule His om- 
nipresence and omniscience did not extend within living man. 
Even God's eternal love existed only for creation as a whole. 
As soon as there is a clash of interests with individual human 
beings or nations (Sodom and Gomorrah for instance!) perhaps 
even with the whole population of a planet (through an in- 
crease of nervousness or immorality), the instinct of self- 
preservation must be aroused in God as in every other living 
being. Ultimately that of course is perfect which serves its 
own particular purpose, even if human imagination could pic- 
ture a still more ideal condition.” This purpose was neverthe- 
less achieved: for God eternal joy at His creation, for human 


me. Among them [ saw Ariman at night, not in a dream but while awake and 
Ormuzd on several successive days while I was in the garden. At the time I was 
accompanied only by the attendant M. I am forced to assume that the latter was at 
that time not a real human being but a fleeting-improvised-man, because he 
would otherwise have been so dazzled by the light phenomena which he must 
have seen (they occupied almost a %th to an %th part of the sky}, that he would 


have expressed astonishment in some way. 


20. No one would wish to deny that the human organism is one of high perfection. 
Yet perhaps most people have at one time thought how nice it would be if man 
could also fly like the birds. 


4 
40 





Crisis in God's realms?... 


beings the joy of life during their earthly existence, and after 
death the greatest happiness, the state of Blessedness. It is 
quite unthinkable that God would have denied any single hu- 
man being his share in the state of Blessedness as every in- 
crease of the “forecourts of heaven” could only serve to increase 
His own power and strengthen His defenses against the dan- 
gers of His approaching mankind. No clash of interests be- 
tween God and individual human beings could arise as long 
as the latter behaved according to the Order of the World. If 
despite this such a clash of interests arose in my case because 
of supposed soul murder, this can only be due to such a mar- 
velous concatination of events”! as probably never before hap- 
pened in the history of the world, and I hope will never happen 
again. Even in such an extraordinary case the Order of the 
World carries its own remedies for healing the wounds in- 
flicted upon it; the remedy is Eternity. Whilst I had earlier (for 
about two years} believed I had to assume and was forced 
by my experiences to assume, that if God were permanently 
tied to my person, all creation on earth would have to perish 
with the exception of some play-with-miracles in my immedi- 
ate surroundings, I have had reason lately to modify this idea 
considerably. 

Some people were made very unhappy; I may say that I my- 
self lived through cruel times and endured bitter sufferings. On 
the other hand six years of uninterrupted influx of God’s 
nerves into my body has led to the total loss of all the states of 
Blessedness which had accumulated until then and made it 
impossible for the time being to renew them; the state of 
Blessedness is so to speak suspended and all human beings 
who have since died or will die can for the time being not at- 
tain to it. For God's nerves also it is unpleasant and against 





21. More of this later, 


41 





MEMOIRS 


their will to enter into my body, shown by the continual cries 
for help which I daily hear in the sky from those parts of the 
nerves which have become separated from the total mass of 
nerves. All these losses can however be made good again 
insofar as an Eternity exists, even though total restoration of 
the previous state may take thousands of years. 


42 





(Not printed) 


THE CONTENT OF Chapters 1 and 2 was a necessary 
preliminary to what follows. What could so far only partially 
be put up as axiomatic, will now be proved as far as at all 
possible. 

I will first consider some events concerning other members 
of my family, which may possibly in some way be related to 
the presumed sou! murder; these are all more or less mysteri- 
ous, and can hardly be explained in the light of usual human 
experience. 

(The further content of this chapter is omitted as unfit for 
publication.) 


43 





Personal experiences during 
the first and the beginning of 
the second nervous illness 


| COME NOW to my personal fortunes during the two 
nervous illnesses which I have suffered. I have twice had a 
nervous illness, each time in consequence of mental over- 
strain, the first (while Chairman of the County Court of Chem- 
nitz) was occasioned by my candidature for parliament, the 
second by the extraordinary burden of work on taking up office 
as President of the Senate of a Court of Appeal in Dresden, to 
which I had been newly appointed. 

The first of the two illnesses commenced in the autumn of 
1884 and was fully cured at the end of 1885, so that I was able 
to resume work as Chairman of the County Court at Leipzig to 
which I had in the meantime been transferred on Ist January 
1886. The second nervous illness began in October 1893 and 
still continues. I spent the greater part of both illnesses in the 
Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Leipzig under the Direc- 
torship of Professor Flechsig, the first time from early De- 
cember 1884 to the beginning of June 1885, the second time 
from about the middle of November 1893 till about the middle 


44 





Personal experiences during the first... 


of June 1894. In each case when first I entered the Asylum I 
had not the faintest idea of an antagonism existing between 
the Schreber and Flechsig families, nor of the supernatural 
matters of which I have treated in the preceding chapters. 

The first illness passed without any occurrences bordering 
on the supernatural, and while it lasted I had on the whole 
only favorable impressions of Professor Flechsig’s methods of 
treatment. Some mistakes may have been made. Even in the 
course of that illness I was and still am of the opinion that 
white lies, which a nerve specialist may perhaps not be able to 
dispense with altogether in the case of some mental patients, 
but which he must nevertheless employ only with the greatest 
circumspection, were hardly ever appropriate in my case, for 
he must soon have realized that in me he was dealing with a 
human being of high intellect, of uncommon keenness of un- 
derstanding and acute powers of observation. Yet I could only 
consider it a white lie when, for instance, Professor Flechsig 
wanted to put down my illness solely to poisoning with potas- 
sium bromide, for which Dr. R. in S., in whose care I had been 
before, was to be blamed. I believe I could have been more 
rapidly cured of certain hypochondriacal ideas with which I 
was preoccupied at the time, particularly concern over loss 
of weight, if I had been allowed to operate the scales which 
served to weigh patients a few times myself; the scales used 
in the University Clinic at the time were of a peculiar con- 
struction unfamiliar to me. All the same these are only minor 
points on which I place little importance; perhaps it is unrea- 
sonable to expect the Director of a big Asylum with hundreds 
of patients to concern himself in such detail with the mental 
state of a single patient. The main point was that I was eventu- 
ally cured (after a prolonged convalescence), and therefore I 
had at the time no reason to be other than most grateful to 
Professor Flechsig; I gave this special expression by a subse- 
quent visit and in my opinion an adequate honorarium. My 


45 





MEMOIRS 


wife felt even more sincere gratitude and worshiped Professor 
Flechsig as the man who had restored her husband to her; for 
this reason she kept his picture on her desk for many years. 

After recovering from my first illness I spent eight years 
with my wife, on the whole quite happy ones, rich also in out- 
ward honors and marred only from time to time by the repeated 
disappointment of our hope of being blessed with children. In 
June 1893 I was informed (in the first place by the Minister of 
Justice, Dr. Schurig in person) of my impending appointment 
as Senatsprdsident to the Superior Court in Dresden. 

During this time I had several dreams to which I did not 
then attribute any particular significance, and which I would 
even today disregard as the proverb says “Dreams are mere 
shadows,” had my experience in the meantime not made 
me think of the possibility at least of their being connected 
with the contact which had been made with me by divine 
nerves. I dreamt several times that my former nervous illness 
had returned; naturally I was as unhappy about this in the 
dream, as I felt happy on waking that it had only been a dream. 
Furthermore, one morning while still in bed (whether still 
half asleep or already awake I cannot remember), I had a feel- 
ing which, thinking about it later when fully awake, struck 
me as highly peculiar. It was the idea that it really must be 
rather pleasant to be a woman succumbing to intercourse. 
This idea was so foreign to my whole nature that I may say I 
would have rejected it with indignation if fully awake; from 
what I have experienced since I cannot exclude the possibility 
that some external influences were at work to implant this 
idea in me. 

On the Ist of October 1893 I took up office as Senatspra- 
sident to the Superior Court in Dresden. I have already men- 
tioned the heavy burden of work I found there. I was driven, 
maybe by personal ambition, but certainly also in the interests 
of the office, to achieve first of all the necessary respect among 


r 
46 





Personal experiences during the first... 


my colleagues and others concerned with the Court (barristers, 
etc.) by unquestionable efficiency. The task was all the heavier 
and demanded all the more tact in my personal dealings with 
the members of the panel of five Judges over which I had to 
preside, as almost all of them were much senior to me (up to 
twenty years}, and anyway they were much more intimately 
acquainted with the procedure of the Court, to which I was 
a newcomer. It thus happened that after a few weeks I had 
already overtaxed myself mentally. I started to sleep badly at 
the very moment when I was able to feel that I had largely 
mastered the difficulties of settling down in my new office and 
in my new residence, etc. I started taking sodium bromide. 
There was almost no opportunity for social distraction which 
would certainly have been very much better for me—this be- 
came evident to me when I slept considerably better after the 
only occasion on which we had been asked to a dinner party— 
but we hardly knew anybody in Dresden. The first really bad, 
that is to say almost sleepless nights, occurred in the last days 
of October or the first days of November. It was then that an 
extraordinary event occurred. During several nights when I 
could not get to sleep, a recurrent crackling noise in the wall of 
our bedroom became noticeable at shorter or longer intervals; 
time and again it woke me as I was about to go to sleep. 
Naturally we thought of a mouse although it was very extraor- 
dinary that a mouse should have found its way to the first 
floor of such a solidly built house. But having heard similar 
noises innumerable times since then, and still hearing them 
around me every day in day-time and at night, I have come to 
recognize them as undoubted divine miracles—they are called 
“interferences” by the voices talking to me—and I must at 
least suspect, without being too definite about it, that even 
then it was already a matter of such a miracle; in other words 
that right from the beginning the more or less definite inten- 
tion existed to prevent my sleep and later my recovery from 


47 





MEMOIRS 


the illness resulting from the insomnia for a purpose which 
cannot at this stage be further specified” 

My illness now began to assume a menacing character; al- 
ready on the 8th or 9th of November Doctor O., whom I had 
consulted, made me take a week’s sick leave, which we were 
going to use to consult Professor Flechsig, in whom we placed 
all our faith since his successful treatment of my first illness. 
Because it was a Sunday and Professor Flechsig would not be 
available, we (my wife and I} traveled via Chemnitz and spent 
the night from Sunday to Monday with my brother-in-law. 
That evening I was given an injection of morphine, and for the 
first time chloral during the night—perhaps accidentally not 
in the dosage ordered right away; the previous evening I suf- 
fered as severely from palpitation as in my first illness, so that 
walking up only a moderate incline caused attacks of anxiety. 
The night in Chemnitz was also bad. Early the following day 
(Monday) we traveled to Leipzig and from the Bavarian Station 
by cab direct to Professor Flechsig at the University Clinic, 
having advised him of our visit the day before by telegram. A 
long interview followed in which I must say Professor Flechsig 
developed a remarkable eloquence which affected me deeply. 
He spoke of the advances made in psychiatry since my first 
illness, of newly discovered sleeping drugs, etc., and gave me 
hope of delivering me of the whole illness through one prolific 
sleep, which was to start if possible at three o'clock in the af- 
ternoon and last to the following day. 

My mood thereupon became steadier, also perhaps because 





22. I must not omit to add that it amounted to nothing more than a dolus indeter- 
minatus carried to the extreme—if a legal expression be permitted—an attribute 
of the character of the souls which I have in the meantime got to know; that is to 
say intentions which were very frequently followed by a change of mind and 
mood as soon as close reflection brought the conviction that the person con- 
cerned was really worthy of a better fate. 


48 





Personal experiences during the first... 


traveling through the fresh morning air for several hours and 
the time of day (morning) might have strengthened my nerves 
a little. We went right away to the chemist to fetch the sleep- 
ing drug prescribed, then had a meal with my mother at her 
house, and I spent the rest of the day quite bearably, going for a 
little walk amongst other things. Naturally I did not get to bed 
(in my mother’s house} as early as 3 o’clock, but (possibly ac- 
cording to some secret instruction which my wife had received) 
it was delayed until the 9th hour. More serious symptoms de- 
veloped again immediately before going to bed. Unfortunately 
the bed was cold because it had been aired too long, with the 
result that I was immediately seized by a severe rigor and was 
already in a state of great excitement when I took the sleeping 
drug. Because of this the sleeping drug failed almost entirely in 
its effect, and after one or more hours my wife also gave me 
the chloral hydrate which was kept at hand in reserve. Despite 
this I spent the night almost without sleep, and once even left 
the bed in an attack of anxiety in order to make preparations 
for a kind of suicidal attempt by means of a towel or suchlike; 
this woke my wife who stopped me. The next morning my 
nerves were badly shattered; the blood had gone from my ex- 
tremities to the heart, my mood was gloomy in the extreme 
and Professor Flechsig, who had been sent for early in the 
morning, therefore advised my admission into his Asylum, for 
which I set out immediately by cab accompanied by him. 
After a warm bath I was at once put to bed, which I did not 
leave again for the next 4 or 5 days. A certain R...was as- 
signed to me as attendant. My illness progressed rapidly during 
the following days; the nights passed mostly without sleep 
because the weaker sleeping drugs (camphor, etc.) which were 
tried first so as to avoid the permanent use of chloral hydrate 
from the beginning, failed to act. I could not occupy myself 
in any way; nor did I see anybody of my family. I passed the 
days therefore in endless melancholy; my mind was occupied 


49 





MEMOIRS 


almost exclusively with thoughts of death. It seems to me in 
retrospect that Professor Flechsig’s plan of curing me consisted 
in intensifying my nervous depression as far as possible, in 
order to bring about a cure all at once by a sudden change 
of mood. At least this is the only way I can explain the follow- 
ing event, which I could otherwise only attribute to malicious 
intent.” 

About the fourth or fifth night after my admission to the 
Asylum, I was pulled out of bed by two attendants in the mid- 
dle of the night and taken to a cell fitted out for dements (ma- 
niacs) to sleep in. I was already in a highly excited state, in a 
fever delirium so to speak, and was naturally terrified in the 
extreme by this event, the reasons for which I did not know. 
The way led through the billiard room; there, because I had no 
idea what one intended to do with me and therefore thought I 
had to resist, a fight started between myself clad only in a 
shirt, and the two attendants, during which I tried to hold fast 
to the billiard table, but was eventually overpowered and re- 
moved to the above-mentioned cell. There I was left to my 
fate; I spent the rest of the night mostly sleepless in this cell, 
furnished only with an iron bedstead and some bedding. 
Regarding myself as totally lost, I made a naturally unsuccess- 
ful attempt during the night to hang myself from the bedstead 
with the sheet. I was completely ruled by the idea that there 
was nothing left for a human being for whom sleep could no 
longer be procured by all the means of medical art, but to take 


23. I must mention that during a later conversation Professor Flechsig denied the 
whole occurrence in the billiard room and all connected with it, and tried to make 
out that it was only a figment of my imagination—this by the way was one of the 
circumstances which from then on made me somewhat distrustful of Professor 
Flechsig. But that it really happened and that there could be no question of my 
senses being deceived is certain, because it cannot be denied that in the morning 
after the night in question I found myself in the padded cell and was visited there 
by Dr. Tauscher. 


50 





Personal experiences during the first... 


his life. I knew that this was not permitted in Asylums, but I 
labored under the delusion that when all attempts at cure had 
been exhausted, one would be discharged—solely for the pur- 
pose of making an end to one’s life either in one’s own home or 
somewhere else. 

I was therefore greatly surprised when on the following 
morning the doctor still came to see me. Professor Flechsig’s 
Assistant Physician, Dr. Tauscher appeared, and told me that 
there was no intention whatsoever of giving up treatment; 
this, coupled with the manner in which he tried to raise my 
spirits again—I cannot deny him also my appreciation of the ex- 
cellent way he spoke to me on that occasion—had the effect of 
a very favorable change in my mood. I was led back to the room 
I had previously occupied and spent the best day of the whole 
of my (second) stay in Flechsig’s Asylum, that is to say the 
only day on which I was enlivened by a joyful spirit of hope. 
Even the attendant R. behaved most tactfully and skillfully in 
his whole conservation, so that in retrospect I sometimes 
asked myself whether he also had received higher inspirations 
(in the same way as Dr. Tauscher). In the morning I even 
played billiards with him, had a hot bath in the afternoon and 
maintained my better mood until the evening. They were go- 
ing to see whether I could sleep entirely without sleeping 
drugs. Indeed I went to bed relatively calm, but could not get 
to sleep. After a few hours I could no longer remain calm; the 
rush of blood to my heart again caused attacks of anxiety. After 
the change-over of attendants—an attendant sat constantly by 
my bed and was relieved by another in the middle of the 
night—something to make me sleep was eventually given— 
“Nekrin” or some such name—and I must have fallen asleep 
for a short while, which however no longer strengthened my 
nerves in any way. On the contrary my nerves were shattered 
again the following morning, indeed so badly that I vomited 
the breakfast. A particularly terrifying impression was created 


51 





MEMOTRS 


in me by the totally distorted features which I thought I could 
see on the attendant R. when I awoke. 

From then on I was regularly given chloral hydrate every 
night, and the following weeks were at least outwardly a little 
calmer, because in this way moderate sleep was usually pro- 
cured. My wife visited me regularly and in the last two weeks 
before Christmas I spent part of every day at my mother’s 
house. But the hyper-excitability of my nerves remained and 
got worse rather than better. In the weeks after Christmas I 
went for a drive every day with my wife and the attendant. But 
I was so weak that when I got out of the carriage (in Rosenthal 
or in Scheibenholz) every little distance of a few hundred paces 
seemed a hazard on which I could not decide without inner 
anxiety. In other respects too my whole nervous system was in 
a state of utter laxity. I could hardly, if at all, manage any intel- 
lectual occupation such as reading newspapers. Even mainly 
mechanical occupations such as jig-saw puzzles, patience and 
suchlike increased my nervous tension to such a degree that I 
usually had to stop after a short time; I could scarcely even 
play a few games of checkers with the attendant R...in the 
evening. During that time I mostly ate and drank well, and was 
still in the habit of smoking several cigars a day. The laxity 
of my nerves increased with the simultaneous reappearance of 
states of anxiety, whenever they again tried giving me weaker 
sleeping drugs instead of chloral hydrate, which, although it 
strengthens the nerves temporarily, nevertheless damages them 
if used for any length of time. My will to live was completely 
broken; I could see nothing in the future but a fatal outcome, 
perhaps produced by committing suicide eventually; as to the 
plans for the future with which my wife tried again and again 
to raise my spirits, I could only shake my head in disbelief. 

A further decline in my nervous state and an important 
chapter in my life commenced about the 15th of February 1894 
when my wife, who until then had spent a few hours every day 


52 





Personal experiences during the first... 


with me and had also taken lunch with me in the Asylum, un- 
dertook a four-day journey to her father in Berlin in order to 
have a holiday herself, of which she was in urgent need. My 
condition deteriorated so much in these four days that after 
her return I saw her only once more, and then declared that I 
could not wish my wife to see me again in the low state into 
which I had fallen. From then on my wife’s visits ceased; when 
after a long time I did see her again at the window of a room 
opposite mine, such important changes had meanwhile oc- 
curred in my environment and in myself that I no longer 
considered her a living being, but only thought I saw in her a 
human form produced by miracle in the manner of the “fleet- 
ing-improvised-men.” Decisive for my mental collapse was 
one particular night; during that night I had a quite unusual 
number of pollutions (perhaps half a dozen). 

From then on appeared the first signs of communication 
with supernatural powers, particularly that of nerve-contact 
which Professor Flechsig kept up with me in such a way that 
he spoke to my nerves without being present in person. From 
then on I also gained the impression that Professor Flechsig 
had secret designs against me; this seemed confirmed when I 
once asked him during a personal visit whether he really hon- 
estly believed that I could be cured, and he held out certain 
hopes, but could no longer—at least so it seemed to me—look 
me straight in the eye. 

I must now discuss the nature of the frequently mentioned 
inner voices which since then have spoken to me incessantly, 
and also of what in my opinion is the tendency innate in the 
Order of the World, according to which a human being (a seer 
of spirits”) must under certain circumstances be “unmanned” 
(transformed into a woman} once he has entered into indissol- 
uble contact with divine nerves (rays). The next chapter is 
devoted to an exposition of these circumstances; this is, how- 
ever, infinitely difficult. 


53 





Continuation. 
Nerve-language (inner voices). 
Compulsive thinking. 
Unmanning under certain 
circumstances a postulate of 
the Order of the World 


APART FROM NORMAL human language there is also a 
kind of nerve-language of which, as a rule, the healthy human 
being is not aware. In my opinion this is best understood when 
one thinks of the processes by which a person tries to imprint 
certain words in his memory in a definite order, as for instance 
a child learning a poem by heart which he is going to recite at 
school, or a priest a sermon he is going to deliver in Church. 
The words are repeated silently (as in a silent prayer to which 
the congregation is called from the pulpit}, that is to say a hu- 
man being causes his nerves to vibrate in the way which corre- 
sponds to the use of the words concerned, but the real organs 
of speech (lips, tongue, teeth, etc.) are either not set in motion 
at all or only coincidentally. 

Naturally under normal (in consonance with the Order of 
the World) conditions, use of this nerve-language depends only 
on the will of the person whose nerves are concerned; no 
human being as such can force another to use this nerve- 


54 
L 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


language.* In my case, however, since my nervous illness took 
the above-mentioned critical turn, my nerves have been set in 
motion from without incessantly and without any respite. 

Divine rays above all have the power of influencing the 
nerves of a human being in this manner; by this means God 
has always been able to infuse dreams into a sleeping human 
being. I myself first felt this influence as emanating from 
Professor Flechsig. The only possible explanation I can think 
of is that Professor Flechsig in some way knew how to put di- 
vine rays to his own use; later, apart from Professor Flechsig’s 
nerves, direct divine rays also entered into contact with my 
nerves. This influence has in the course of years assumed 
forms more and more contrary to the Order of the World and 
to man’s natural right to be master of his own nerves, and I 
might say become increasingly grotesque. 

This influence showed itself relatively early in the form of 
compulsive thinking—an expression which I received from the 
inner voices themselves and which will hardly be known to 
other human beings, because the whole phenomenon lies out- 
side all human experience. The nature of compulsive thinking 
lies in a human being having to think incessantly; in other 
words, man’s natural right to give the nerves of his mind their 
necessary rest from time to time by thinking nothing (as oc- 
curs most markedly during sleep) was from the beginning 
denied me by the rays in contact with me; they continually 
wanted to know what I was thinking about. For instance I was 
asked in these very words: “What are you thinking of now?”; 
because this question is in itself complete nonsense, as a hu- 
man being can at certain times as well think of nothing as of 
thousands of things at the same time, and because my nerves 


25. Hypnotizing is perhaps an exception, but as a layman in psychiatry I know too 
little to permit expression of an opinion. 


55 





MEMOIRS 


did not react to this absurd question, one was soon driven to 
take refuge in a system of falsifying my thoughts. For instance 
the above question was answered spontaneously: “He should” 
scilicet think** “about the Order of the World”; that is to say 
the influence of the rays forced my nerves to perform the 
movements corresponding to the use of these words. The num- 
ber of points from which contact with my nerves originated in- 
creased with time: apart from Professor Flechsig, who was the 
only one whom for a time at least I knew definitely to be 
among the living, they were mostly departed souls who began 
more and more to interest themselves in me. 

In this connection I could mention hundreds if not thou- 
sands of names, many of which I learnt later, when some 
contact with the outside world was restored to me through 
newspapers and letters, were still among the living; whereas 
at the time, when as souls they were in contact with my 
nerves, I could only think they had long since departed this 
life. Many of the bearers of these names were particularly 
interested in religion, many were Catholics who expected a 


26. The word “think” was omitted in the above answer. This was because the 
souls were in the habit—even before the conditions contrary to the Order of the 
World had started-—of giving their thoughts (when communicating with one an- 
other] grammatically incomplete expression; that is to say they omitted certain 
words which were not essential for the sense. In the course of time this habit de- 
generated into an abominable abuse of me, because a human being’s nerves of 
mind (his “foundation” as the expression goes in the basic language} were excited 
continuously by such interrupted phrases, because they automatically try to find 
the word that is missing to make up the sense. For instance as one of innumerable 
examples, I have for years heard hundreds of times each day the question: “Why 
do you not say it?,” the word “aloud” necessary to complete the sense being omit- 
ted, and the rays giving the answer themselves as if it came from me: “Because I 
am stupid perhaps.” For years my nerves have had to endure incessantly such and 
similar terrible nonsense in dreary monotony {as if it came from them). I will later 
say more about the reason for the choice of expressions and the effects they were 
designed to produce. 


56 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


furtherance of Catholicism from the way I was expected to 
behave, particularly the Catholicizing of Saxony and Leipzig; 
amongst them were the Priest S. in Leipzig, “14 Leipzig 
Catholics” (of whom only the name of the Consul General 
D. was indicated to me, presumably a Catholic Club or its 
board). The Jesuit Father S. in Dresden, the Ordinary Arch- 
bishop in Prague, the Cathedral Dean Moufang, the Cardinals 
Rampolla, Galimberti and Casati, the Pope himself who was 
the leader of a peculiar “scorching ray,” finally numerous 
monks and nuns; on one occasion 240 Benedictine Monks un- 
der the leadership of a Father whose name sounded like Star- 
kiewicz, suddenly moved into my head to perish therein. In 
the case of other souls, religious interests were mixed with 
national motives; amongst these was a Viennese nerve spe- 
cialist whose name by coincidence was identical with that of 
the above-named Benedictine Father, a baptized Jew and 
Slavophile, who wanted to make Germany Slavic through me 
and at the same time wanted to institute there the rule of 
Judaism; like Professor Flechsig for Germany, England and 
America (that is mainly Germanic States}, he appeared to be 
in his capacity as nerve specialist a kind of administrator of 
God’s interests in another of God’s provinces (the Slavic 
parts of Austria}; because of this a battle arose for a time be- 
tween him and Professor Flechsig through jealousy as to 
who was to predominate. Another group consisted mainly of 
former members of the Students’ Corps Saxonia in Leipzig, to 
which Professor Flechsig belonged as drinking member” and 
who were, I believed, helped by him to Blessedness; among 
them were the lawyer Dr. G.S. in Dresden, the Doctor of 


27. This also I had not known before, but only learnt from the voices that talk to 
me through contact with my nerves. It would therefore be interesting to ascertain 
whether this relatively unimportant detail of Professor Flechsig’s earlier life is 
correct. 


57 





MEMOIRS 


Medicine S. in Leipzig, Senior District Judge G. and many 
younger members of the Corps who were later called “those 
suspended under Cassiopeia.” There were also many members 
of the Students’ Union who had gained such great ascendency 
for a time that they were able to occupy the planets Jupiter, 
Saturn and Uranus; the most prominent of them were the 
lawyer A.K., Vice-President of the Prussian Chamber of Dep- 
uties, whom by the way I never knew personally, the Uni- 
versity Dean Professor W., and the lawyer H. in Leipzig. They 
and the previously mentioned members of the Corps Saxonia 
treated the whole affair going on in my head merely as a con- 
tinuation of the old feud between members of the Corps and 
the Students’ Union. There were also Dr. Wachter, who was 
to take up a position of leadership on Sirius, Dr. Hoffmann, 
who was to take up a similar position on the Pleiades and who 
therefore, having been dead a long time, appeared already to 
have reached a higher degree of Blessedness. Both knew me 
personally in their lifetime and presumably for that reason 
took a certain interest in me. 

Finally I wish to name some of my relatives (apart from my 
father and brother who have already been mentioned above, 
my mother, my wife and my father-in-law), the friend of my 
youth Ernest K., who died in 1864, and a Prince who appeared 
on my head as a “little man,” in the sense to be explained 
later, and there in a manner of speaking went a-walking. 

All these souls spoke to me as “voices” more or less at 
the same time without one knowing of the presence of the 
others. Everyone who realizes that all this is not just the mor- 
bid offspring of my fantasy, will be able to appreciate the 
unholy turmoil they caused in my head. It is true the souls 
had at that time still their own thoughts and were therefore 
able to give information of the highest interest to me; they 
were also able to answer questions, whereas for a long time 
now the talk of the voices has consisted only of a terrible, 


4 
58 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


monotonous repetition of ever-recurring phrases (learnt by 
rote). The reason for this I will give later. Besides those souls 
who were recognizable as specific individuals, there were at 
the same time other voices pretending to be God’s omnipo- 
tence itself in higher and higher instances (compare footnote 
19}; for these the individual souls appeared to act, so to speak, 
as Outposts. 

The second point to be discussed in this chapter is the ten- 
dency, innate in the Order of the World, to unman a human 
being who has entered into permanent contact with rays. This 
is connected on the one hand with the nature of God's nerves, 
through which Blessedness (the enjoyment of which is dis- 
cussed on pages 28 and 29) is felt, if not exclusively as, at least 
accompanied by, a greatly increased feeling of voluptuousness; 
on the other hand it is connected with the basic plan on which 
the Order of the World seems to rest, that in the case of world 
catastrophes which necessitate the destruction of mankind 
on any star, whether intentionally or otherwise, the human 
race can be renewed. When on some star moral decay (“volup- 
tuous excesses”) or perhaps nervousness has seized the whole 
of mankind to such an extent that the forecourts of heaven 
(compare footnote 11} could not be expected to be adequately 
replenished by their excessively blackened nerves, or there 
was reason to fear a dangerous increase of attraction on God’s 
nerves, then the destruction of the human race on that star 
could occur either spontaneously (through annihilating epi- 
demics, etc.) or, being decided on by God, be put into effect by 
means of earthquakes, deluges, etc. Perhaps God was also able 
to withdraw partially or totally the warmth of the sun from a 
star doomed to perish (or the respective fixed star which served 
to warm it}; this would throw new light on the problem of the 
Ice Age which, as far as I know, has not yet been solved by sci- 
ence. The objection that at the time of the Ice Age on earth, 
humanity existed only in its (diluvial) beginnings, could hardly 


59 





MEMOIRS 


be regarded as conclusive. Who can say whether at that time a 
highly developed race of man did not exist on some other 
planet, perhaps Venus, upon whose destruction God was bent 
and which could not be carried out without at the same time 
causing considerable cooling of the earth which had remained 
behind in its development?” In all these matters human beings 
must strive to see beyond their ingrained petty geocentric 
ideas and regard the matter from the lofty viewpoint of eter- 
nity. It is possible that in this sense Cuvier’s theory of periodi- 
cally recurring world catastrophes contains some truth. In 
such an event, in order to maintain the species, one single hu- 
man being was spared—perhaps the relatively most moral— 
called by the voices that talk to me the “Eternal Jew.” This 
appellation has therefore a somewhat different sense from that 
underlying the legend of the same name of the Jew Ahasver; 
one is however automatically reminded of the legends of Noah, 
Deucalion and Pyrrha, etc. Perhaps the legend of the founding 
of Rome belongs here also, according to which Rhea Sylvia 
conceived the later Kings Romulus and Remus directly of 
Mars the God of War, and not of an earthly father. The Eternal 
Jew {in the sense described) had to be unmanned (transformed 
into a woman) to be able to bear children. This process of un- 
manning consisted in the (external) male genitals (scrotum and 
penis) being retracted into the body and the internal sexual or- 
gans being at the same time transformed into the correspond- 
ing female sexual organs, a process which might have been 
completed in a sleep lasting hundreds of years, because the 
skeleton (pelvis, etc.) had also to be changed. A regression oc- 
curred therefore, or a reversal of that developmental process 





29. Indeed I had visions (dream images) during my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum from 
which it appeared that other planets had existed which were more infected by 
moral decay than the earth, the inhabitants of our earth being in comparison dis- 
tinguished by greater moral purity. 


60 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


which occurs in the human embryo in the fourth or fifth month 
of pregnancy, according to whether nature intends the future 
child to be of male or female sex. It is well known that in 
the first months of pregnancy the rudiments of both sexes 
are laid down and the characteristics of the sex which is not 
developed remain as rudimentary organs at a lower stage of 
development, like the nipples of the male. The rays of the 
lower God (Ariman} have the power of producing the miracle 
of unmanning; the rays of the upper God (Ormuzd) have the 
power of restoring manliness when necessary. I have myself 
twice experienced (for a short time} the miracle of unmanning 
on my own body, as already mentioned in footnote 1; that 
the miracle did not reach full development and that it was 
even reversed again, was due only to the fact that, apart from 
the pure rays of God, other rays were present led by “tested” 
(impure) souls (compare page 35 above}, Flechsig’s rays and 
others, which prevented the completion of the process of 
transformation in its purity and in accordance with the Order 
of the World. The Eternal Jew was maintained and provided 
with the necessary means of life by the “fleeting-improvised- 
men” (compare footnote 1 above); that is to say souls were 
for this purpose transitorily put into human shape by miracles, 
probably not only for the lifetime of the Eternal Jew him- 
self but for many generations, until his offspring were suffi- 
ciently numerous to be able to maintain themselves. This 
seems to be the main purpose of the institution of “fleeting- 
improvised-men” in the Order of the World. I cannot say 
whether it also perhaps served the purpose of providing souls 
in the process of purification with the opportunity of doing 
some job of work—necessary for their purification—by putting 
them into human form (compare page 25 above}; however 
that may be, the purpose of the fleeting-improvised-men was 
not only a mere play-with-miracles, into which it degenerated 
towards me in the latter part of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum, 


61 





MEMOIRS 


during my time in Pierson’s Asylum and in the early days of 
my stay in this Asylum.” 

It is my opinion that Professor Flechsig must have had 
some idea of this tendency, innate in the Order of the World, 
whereby in certain conditions the unmanning of a human be- 
ing is provided for; perhaps he thought of this himself or these 
ideas were inspired in him by divine rays, which I think is 
more likely. A fundamental misunderstanding obtained how- 
ever, which has since run like a red thread through my entire 
life. It is based upon the fact that, within the Order of the 
World, God did not really understand the living human being 
and had no need to understand him, because, according to the 
Order of the World, He dealt only with corpses. The other rele- 
vant issue is the dependence on Professor Flechsig, or on his 
soul, in which God found Himself through His inability to dis- 
solve again the nerve-contact which Professor Flechsig had 
managed to establish and then to abuse by holding fast to it. 
Thus began the policy of vacillation in which attempts to cure 
my nervous illness*! alternated with efforts to annihilate me as 
a human being who, because of his ever-increasing nervous- 
ness, had become a danger to God Himself. From this devel- 
oped a policy of half measures (“half-heartedness” is the 
expression which I heard repeatedly), entirely in keeping with 





30. I have had some indications that before my own case, perhaps in some vastly 
dim and distant period of the past and on other stars, there might even have been 
a number of Eternal Jews. The voices that talk to me named some of them; 
amongst them occurred, if I am not mistaken, something like the name of a 
Polish Count Czartorisky. One need not necessarily associate this with the Polish 
nation of our earth, but has to bear in mind the possibility that the Polish nation 
may lead a second existence on some other star through the transmigration of 


souls, 


31. This would have been simple to do—anticipating what will be discussed in 
more detail later—by sacrificing a comparatively small number of pure rays, for 
rays have also the power to calm nerves and to bring sleep. 


62 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


the souls’ character, who were used to uninterrupted enjoy- 
ment, and were therefore not or only little capable of tempo- 
rary sacrifice or temporary denial of pleasure in order to 
procure permanent advantages in the future, a quality which is 
peculiar to human beings. The contact established with my 
nerves became more indissoluble, the more miracles were 
directed against me. In the meantime Professor Flechsig had 
found a way of raising himself up to heaven, either with the 
whole or part of his soul, and so making himself a leader of 
rays, without prior death and without undergoing the process 
of purification. In this way a plot was laid against me (perhaps 
March or April 1894), the purpose of which was to hand me 
over to another human being after my nervous illness had been 
recognized as, or assumed to be, incurable, in such a way that 
my soul was handed to him, but my body—transformed into a 
female body and, misconstruing the above-described funda- 
mental tendency of the Order of the World—was then left to 
that human being for sexual misuse and simply “forsaken,” in 
other words left to rot. One does not seem to have been quite 
clear as to what was to happen to such a “forsaken” human be- 
ing, nor whether this actually meant his death. I have not the 
slightest doubt that this plot really existed, with the proviso 
always that I do not dare maintain that Professor Flechsig took 
part in it in his capacity as a human being. Naturally such 
matters were not mentioned by Professor Flechsig when he 
faced me as a human being. But the purpose was clearly ex- 
pressed in the nerve-language, as it was called at the beginning 
of this chapter, that is in the nerve-contact which he main- 
tained at the same time as a soul. The way I was treated exter- 
nally seemed to agree with the intention announced in the 
nerve-language; for weeks I was kept in bed and my clothes 
were removed to make me—as I believed—more amenable 
to voluptuous sensations, which could be stimulated in me by 
the female nerves which had already started to enter my body; 


63 





MEMOIRS 


medicines, which I am convinced served the same purpose, 
were also used;” these I therefore refused, or spat out again 
when an attendant poured them forcibly into my mouth. 
Having, as I thought, definitely come to realize this abom- 
inable intention, one may imagine how my whole sense of 
manliness and manly honor, my entire moral being, rose up 
against it, all the more so as I was stirred at that time by the 
first revelations about divine affairs which I had received 
through contact with other souls, and was completely filled by 
holy ideas about God and the Order of the World. Completely 
cut off from the outside world, without any contact with my 
family, left in the hands of rough attendants with whom, the 
inner voices said, it was my duty to fight now and then to 
prove my manly courage, I could think of nothing else but that 
any manner of death, however frightful, was preferable to so 
degrading an end. I therefore decided to end my life by starving 
to death and refused all food; the inner voices always reiterated 
that it was my duty to die of hunger and in this way to sacri- 
fice myself for God, and that therefore any partaking of meals 
which my body demanded was a weakness unworthy of me. 
This resulted in the so-called “feeding system” being started: 
attendants, mostly the same ones—apart from R. already men- 
tioned, a certain H. and a third whose name I do not know— 
forced food into my mouth, at times with the utmost brutality. 
Again and again one of them held my hands while the other 
knelt on me as] lay in bed in order to empty food or pour beer 
into my mouth. 

Every bath I took was connected with ideas of drowning. In 
the nerve-language one spoke of “purifying baths” and “holy 
baths”; the purpose of the latter was to give me the oppor- 
tunity of drowning myself. I nearly always entered the bath 





32. Especially a white ointment which may have been bismuth or something else 


as far as I, a layman in medicine, can tell. 


64 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


inwardly afraid that its purpose was to end my life. The 
inner voices (particularly the souls belonging to the above- 
mentioned Students’ Corps Saxonia, the so-called Brothers of 
Cassiopeia) spoke to me continuously in this sense and derided 
my lack of manly courage to carry it out; this made me repeat- 
edly attempt to put my head under the water; sometimes the 
attendants would then raise my feet above the water so seem- 
ingly facilitating my suicidal intent; they even ducked my 
head repeatedly, and then while making all sorts of rude jokes 
forced me to come to the surface again, and finally leave the 
bath.** In the contact kept up with Professor Flechsig’s nerves I 
constantly demanded cyanide or strychnine from him in order 
to poison myself (a drop of venom-juice, as it was called in the 
basic language); Professor Flechsig—as a soul in nerve-contact 
with me—did not refuse this demand, but always half prom- 
ised it, making its handing over, however, in a hypocritical 
manner conditional on certain guarantees during long hours of 
conversation by nerve-contact, when it was queried whether I 
would really drink the poison if it were given me, etc. When 
Professor Flechsig, on his medical rounds as a human being, 
subsequently came to me, he of course denied all knowledge of 
these matters. Being buried alive was also repeatedly men- 
tioned as a way of ending my life. From the human point of 
view, which on the whole still dominated me at that time, it 
was in consequence very natural for me to see my real enemy 
only in Professor Flechsig or his soul (later in von W.’s soul 
also, about which more will be said below) and to regard as my 
natural ally God’s omnipotence, which I imagined only Pro- 
fessor Flechsig endangered; I therefore thought I had to support 
it by all possible means, even to the point of self-sacrifice. It 


33, Incidentally, this was the time when, in consequence of the miracles directed 
against me, I had a thing between my legs which hardly resembled at all a nor- 
mally formed male organ. 


65 





MEMOIRS 


occurred to me only much later, in fact only while writing this 
essay did it become quite clear to me, that God Himself must 
have known of the plan, if indeed He was not the instigator, to 
commit soul murder on me, and to hand over my body in the 
manner of a female harlot. But I must at once repeat what I ex- 
pressed at the end of Chapter 2, so as not to confuse other peo- 
ple’s religious ideas and feelings: however abominable the 
whole plan was bound to appear to me, subjectively speaking, I 
must nevertheless acknowledge that it originated in that in- 
stinct of self-preservation, as natural in God as in every other 
living being—an instinct which as mentioned in another con- 
text (compare page 59 above} forced God in special circum- 
stances to contemplate the destruction not only of individual 
human beings, but perhaps of whole stars with all the created 
beings upon them. In the nineteenth chapter of the first book 
of Moses we are told that Sodom and Gomorrah were de- 
stroyed by a rain of brimstone and fire, although of their inhab- 
itants there were some, even though very few, “righteous” 
men. Besides, in the whole domain of the created world, no 
one considers it immoral when—as long as it does not con- 
travene the Order of the World—the stronger conquers the 
weaker, a people of higher culture expel from their abode one 
of a lower culture, the cat eats the mouse, the spider kills the 
fly, etc. In any case, the whole idea of morality can arise only 
within the Order of the World, that is to say within the natural 
bond which holds God and mankind together; wherever the 
Order of the World is broken, power alone counts, and the 
right of the stronger is decisive. In my case, moral obliquity lay 
in God placing Himself outside the Order of the World by 
which He Himself must be guided; although not exactly 
forced, He was nevertheless induced to do this by a temptation 
very difficult for souls to resist, which was brought about by 
the presence of Professor Flechsig’s impure (“tested”) soul in 
heaven. Further, by means of the high degree of human intelli- 


66 





Continuation. Nerve-language... 


gence which it still retained, Flechsig’s soul gained certain 
technical advantages (of which more will be said below) over 
those of God’s nerves with which it first came in contact; the 
latter had not, as souls, the capacity for self-denying sacrifice 
necessary to procure me the amount of sleep needed for my 
cure, so rendering Flechsig’s soul harmless. I am inclined to 
regard the whole development as a matter of fate, in which 
neither on God’s nor on my part can there be a question of 
moral infringement. On the contrary, the Order of the World 
reveals its very grandeur and magnificence by denying even 
God Himself in so irregular a case as mine the means of 
achieving a purpose contrary to the Order of the World. All 
attempts at committing soul murder, at unmanning me for 
purposes contrary to the Order of the World** (that is to say 
for the sexual satisfaction of a human being) and later at de- 
struction of my reason, have failed. From this apparently so 
unequal battle between one weak human being and God 
Himself, I emerge, albeit not without bitter sufferings and dep- 
rivations, victorious, because the Order of the World is on my 
side.*> My external circumstances and my bodily condition 
have continued to improve from year to year. And so I live 
in the confident faith that the whole confusion was only an 
episode which will finally lead one way or another to the 


34. To be unmanned could have served a different purpose—one which was in con- 
sonance with the Order of the World—and this was not only within the bounds of 
possibility, but may even indeed have provided the likely solution of the conflict; I 
will discuss this further later on. 


35. (Added November 1902.) The above may seem somewhat obscure, insofar as 
“the Order of the World” may appear as something impersonal and higher, more 
powerful than God or even as ruling God. In fact there is no obscurity. “The Order 
of the World” is the lawful relation which, resting on God’s nature and attributes, 
exists between God and the creation called to life by Him. God cannot achieve 
what contradicts His own attributes and His powers in relation to mankind or, as 
in my case, to an individual human being who had entered into a special relation 


67 





MEMOIRS 


restoration of conditions in consonance with the Order of the 
World. Perhaps the personal misfortunes I had to suffer and the 
loss of the states of Blessedness may even be compensated for, 
in that mankind will gain all at once, through my case, the 
knowledge of religious truth in much greater measure than 
possibly could have been achieved in hundreds and thousands 
of years by means of scientific research with the aid of all pos- 
sible intellectual acuity. It need hardly be said what incalcula- 
ble gain it would be for mankind if, through my personal fate, 
particularly as it will be shaped in the future, the foundations 
of mere materialism and of hazy pantheism would once and for 
all be demolished. 





with Him. God, whose power by rays is essentially constructive in its nature, and 
creative, came into conflict with Himself when he attempted the irregular policy 
against me, aimed solely at destroying my bodily integrity and my reason. This 
policy could therefore only cause temporary damage, but could not lead to perma- 
nent results. Or perhaps, using an oxymoron, God Himself was on my side in His 
fight against me, that is to say I was able to bring His attributes and powers into 
battle as an effective weapon in my self-defense. 


68 





Personal experiences 
continued. Visions. 


“Seer of spirits” 


THE PERIOD | have been trying to describe in the previ- 
ous chapter—from about the middle of March to the end of 
May 1894—assuming always that it was really a matter of a 
few earthly months only and not of centuries—was, I can truly 
say, the most gruesome time of my life. And yet it was also the 
holy time of my life, when my soul was immensely inspired by 
supernatural things, which came over me in ever-increasing 
number amidst the rough treatment which I suffered from out- 
side; when I was filled with the most sublime ideas about God 
and the Order of the World. For all that, I have from my youth 
been anything but inclined towards religious fanaticism. Who- 
ever knew me intimately in my earlier life will bear witness 
that I had been a person of calm nature, without passion, clear- 
thinking and sober, whose individual gift lay much more in 
the direction of cool intellectual criticism than in the creative 
activity of an unbounded imagination. I was by no means what 
one might call a poet, although I have occasionally attempted a 
few verses on family occasions. Nor was I (in my youth) a truly 


69 





MEMOIRS 


believing person in the sense of our positive religion. But nei- 
ther have I been at any time contemptuous of religion; rather I 
avoided talking much about religious matters and I had the 
feeling that people who had luckily retained in their later years 
a pious child’s belief, should not be disturbed in their happi- 
ness. But for my own part I had occupied myself too much 
with the natural sciences, particularly with works based on 
the so-called modern doctrine of evolution, not to have begun 
to doubt, to say the least, the literal truth of all Christian reli- 
gious teachings. My general impression has always been that 
materialism cannot be the last word in religious matters, but I 
could not get myself either to believe firmly in the existence of 
a personal God or to retain such a belief.* 

I am well aware of the difficulties in trying to present fur- 
ther details in this chapter about the period which above I 
called my holy time. The difficulties are in part external and in 
part of an inner nature. In the first place in such an attempt I 
have to rely totally on my memory, because at the time in 
question it was impossible to make notes; I had no writing ma- 
terial at my disposal, nor could I feel inclined to make written 
notes, because at that time—whether rightly or wrongly must 
for the present remain undecided—I believed the whole of 





36. But I am also far from maintaining that I had a particular inclination towards 
philosophy or that I have reached the height of the philosophic education of my 
time; the strenuous profession of a Judge could hardly have left me sufficient 
time. However, I wish to quote some of the works bearing on philosophy or natu- 
ral science which I had read repeatedly during the ten years before my illness, be- 
cause one will find in many places of this essay allusions to ideas contained in 
these works. As examples I will quote only Haeckel, The History of Natural 
Creation; Caspari, Primordial History of Mankind; du Prel, Evolution of the 
Universe; Maedler, Astronomy; Carus Sterne, Beginning and End; Meyer's Journal 
“Between Heaven and Earth”; Neumayer, History of the Earth; Rancke, Man; sev- 
eral philosophical essays by Eduard von Hartmann, particularly in the periodical 
“The Present,” etc., etc. 


70 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


mankind to have perished, so that there was no purpose in 
writing notes. Furthermore the impressions which rushed in 
upon me were such a wonderful mixture of natural events and 
happenings of a supernatural nature, that it is extremely diffi- 
cult to distinguish mere dream visions from experiences in a 
waking state, that is to say to be certain how far all that I 
thought I had experienced was in fact historical reality. It is 
unavoidable therefore that my recollections of that time must 
in some measure bear the stamp of confusion.” 

In order to give a picture first of all of the external condi- 
tions of my stay in the Nerve Clinic of the University, I 


37. In this respect, an event of very recent date has brought considerable clarifica- 
tion. On one of the nights which followed my writing the above, the night of the 
14th to the 15th of March 1900, there was wild play with miracles in my dreams, 
such as I had only experienced earlier, particularly during the time when I was 
sleeping in the padded cell (1896 to end of 1898}, but not at all or only very excep- 
tionally during the last two years. I eventually made an end to these wild miracles 
severely and anxiously disturbing my sleep, by forcing myself to wake up com- 
pletely and turning on the light. It was only 11:30 p.m. (the door which leads 
from my room to the corridor was locked, so that nobody could have come in 
from outside). Despite this early hour of the night I immediately wrote itdownon 
paper because dream visions are known to vanish from memory quickly, and 
because I thought that this event would be more illuminating both for the 
knowledge of the essence of divine miracles, and also for deciding exactly how far 
objective facts were at the basis of my earlier similar visions. From the content of 
these notes I will here only quote that according to the vision produced by miracle 
in my dream, an attendant of the Asylum, whom [ had first heard opening the 
door of the living-room adjoining my bedroom, was partly sitting on my bed, 
partly getting up to some mischief near my bed, at one time eating smoked tongue 
or ham with beans; that I saw myself still in the dream vision having left the 
bed in order to turn on the light so that the miraculous visions should cease; 
but when I awoke fully I found myself still lying in bed so that I had not really left 
my bed at all. One should not ridicule the details given above about the items of 
food. The words used for these ites of food are closely connected with the writ- 
ing-down-system which will be described later; they therefore demonstrate quite 
clearly the intention which prompted these dream visions; in this respect it is also 


71 





MEMOIRS 


append a ground plan of it and a sketch of the grounds in 
which it stands, with such details as are necessary for my 


purposes. 





WINDMILL WAY 







Villa of the 
Director 







Garden of the 
Male Wing 
Main Building 


On the ground floor, 
corridor and Administrative . 
Offices, 
tn the upper storey the 
Director's Room, 
Laboratory, Hall 
and Chapel 












During the time from shortly before Christmas 1893 until 
perhaps the end of February 1894 (that is to say mainly the 
time during which I was regularly visited by my wife) I inhab- 
ited rooms, a, b, and c on the ground floor of the female wing, 





a clue to the knowledge of God and in particular to the dualism reigning in the 
realms of God mentioned at the end of Chapter 1. At this stage I will only remark 
on the following: 

It is almost superfluous to waste words about such a common phenomenon 
as that a restlessly sleeping human being believes he sees dream visions which 
are conjured up, as it were, by his own nerves. But the dreams visions of the 
night just mentioned and similar earlier visions surpassed in their plasticity and 


72 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


which were probably given to me mainly because it was more 
quiet there. Before and after, I inhabited different rooms on 
the first floor of the male wing, each time a living-room and 
a bedroom. The little room d served this purpose for some 
time (in November 1893) because most of the other rooms of 
the Asylum lay on the south side of the corridor facing the 
Bavarian Station, where the whistling of the shunting trains 
was very disturbing, particularly at night. The padded cell to 
which I was removed after the fight in the billiard room de- 
scribed earlier, lay further to the left in the male wing. Towards 
the latter part of my stay in the Asylum I mainly used the 
bedroom i and the living-room e; the former was, in the man- 
ner of a padded room, provided with double doors, the inner 
one of which had a small peep-hole through which the inmate 
could be observed from outside; above the door there was an 





photographic accuracy everything I had ever experienced when I was well. This 
cannot have been caused spontaneously by my own nerves, but must have been 
thrown into them by rays. The rays therefore have the power to influence the 
nervous system and particularly the sensory nerves of a sleeping human being, in 
certain circumstances perhaps even those of a human being who is awake, in such 
a way that the person concerned thinks he can see strangers standing before him 
or hear them speak, believes that he is walking about and carrying on a conversa- 
tion with them, just as if all this were really happening. I know now for certain 
that this is not so, but I maintain that the opposite point of view I used to hold 
was not only due to morbid excitation of my nerves, but that every other human 
being, had he seen similar dream visions, would equally have thought them real. 
Naturally I have to modify some of my earlier statements (compare footnote 39); 
in particular I can no longer doubt but that my meeting our reigning King, an ac- 
count of which is given in footnote 28, was only a dream vision. In what follows I 
will therefore only touch on similar dream visions which I had without number in 
the early years of my illness; I will concentrate mainly on those events during 
which I am certain that I was in a waking state. Nevertheless even such dream vi- 
sions cannot be denied some value for understanding those matters which are 
dealt with here; at least in a few cases it is not impossible that they were symbolic 
expressions of information about things which either really happened or which 
God expected to happen in the future. 


73 





MEMOIRS 


opening provided with a pane of glass through which the light 
of a gas flame could enter. Some of my memories do not tally 
with any of the familiar rooms in Flechsig’s Asylum; this in 
connection with other circumstances made me wonder 
whether in fact I spent the whole time that is dealt with here 
in Flechsig’s Asylum, or whether I was somewhere else for a 
time. Professor Flechsig was assisted in the medical treatment 
by two assistant doctors, Dr. Tauscher and Dr. Quentin. 
During the time which I am discussing, there was a period 
when I did not see any of the doctors, only the attendants be- 
ing around—always the ones named above. The Asylum itself 
gave me at that time the impression of being completely de- 
serted; nor did I see anything of other patients when I entered 
the corridor outside my room. Some time later Professor 
Flechsig reappeared but as mentioned earlier, in a form which 
gave me at least the impression of his having changed consid- 
erably. As far as I can remember I either did not see the assis- 
tant physicians at all or only very occasionally during the 
latter part of my stay in the Asylum. 

I mentioned in the previous chapter that in consequence of 
my ever-increasing nervousness and the resulting increasing 
power of attraction, an ever-growing number of departed souls 
felt attracted to me—primarily those who may have retained 
some special interest in me because of personal contacts with 
me during their life—and then dissolved on my head or in my 
body. This process frequently ended with the souls concerned 
finally leading a short existence on my head in the form of “lit- 
tle men”—tiny figures in human form, perhaps only a few mil- 
limeters in height—before finally vanishing (compare footnote 
28). I suppose that these souls, when they first approached me, 
still possessed a fairly large number of nerves and in virtue of 
them still retained a fairly strong awareness of their identity. 
Each time they approached me they lost part of their nerves in 
favor of my body through the power of attraction; finally they 


74 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


consisted only of one single nerve, which for some mysterious 
reason not further explicable, assumed the form of a “little man” 
in the above sense. This was the final form of existence of these 
souls before they vanished completely. On these occasions I 
was frequently told the names of the stars or groups of stars 
from which they had emanated or “from which they were sus- 
pended”; in part these names tallied with the usual astronomi- 
cal nomenclature, in part they did not. Especially frequent 
were the names Cassiopeia, Wega, Capella, also a star “Gemma” 
{I do not know if this conforms to an astronomical name); fur- 
ther the Crucians (perhaps the Southern Cross?), the “Firm- 
ament” and many others. On some nights the souls finally 
dripped down on to my head, in a manner of speaking, in their 
hundreds if not thousands, as “little men.” I always warned 
them against approaching me, since I had become aware of the 
immensely increased power of attraction of my nerves from 
what had happened earlier, but the souls could not at first be- 
lieve that I had such a dangerous power of attraction. Other 
rays which conducted themselves in the manner described above 
as if they were God’s omnipotence itself, carried names such 
as “the Lord of Hosts,” “the Good Shepherd,” “the Almighty,” 
etc., etc. Connected with these phenomena, very early on there 
predominated in recurrent nightly visions the notion of an ap- 
proaching end of the world, as a consequence of the indissolu- 
ble connection between God and myself. Bad news came in 
from all sides that even this or that star or this or that group of 
stars had to be “given up”; at one time it was said that even 
Venus had been “flooded,” at another that the whole solar sys- 
tem would now have to be “disconnected,” that the Cassiopeia 
(the whole group of stars) had had to be drawn together into a 
single sun, that perhaps only the Pleiades could still be saved, 
etc., etc. While I had these visions at night, in day-time thought 
I could notice the sun following my movements; when I 
moved to and fro in the single-windowed room I inhabited at 


75 





MEMOIRS 


the time, I saw the sunlight now on the right, now on the left 
wall (as seen from the door) depending on my movements. It is 
difficult for me to believe that this observation was a halluci- 
nation because it was made, as mentioned, in day-time, partic- 
ularly as I remember drawing the assistant physician Tauscher’s 
attention on one of his visits to this observation, which natu- 
rally filled me with horror. When later I regularly visited the 
garden again I saw—if my memory does not wholly deceive 
me—two suns in the sky at the same time, one of which was 
our earthly sun, the other was said to be the Cassiopeia group 
of stars drawn together into a single sun. 

From the sum total of my recollections, the impression 
gained hold of me that the period in question, which, accord- 
ing to human calculation, stretched over only three to four 
months, had covered an immensely long period; it was as if 
single nights had the duration of centuries, so that within 
that time the most profound alterations in the whole of 
mankind, in the earth itself and the whole solar system could 
very well have taken place. It was repeatedly mentioned in 
visions that the work of the past fourteen thousand years 
had been lost—this figure presumably indicated the duration 
the earth had been populated with human beings—and that 
approximately only another two hundred years were allotted 
to the earth—if I am not mistaken the figure 212 was men- 
tioned. During the latter part of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum 
I thought this period had already expired* and therefore 


38. This assumption seemed confirmed by some details which I can pass over 
here. Political and religious events played a part as well as the fact that the House 
of Wettin was said to have remembered suddenly their alleged Slavic descent 
and made themselves the protagonists of Slavism, in wide circles of Saxony, par- 
ticularly among the higher nobility (among others the names of “v. W, v. S.” were 
mentioned] a widespread Catholicizing was said to have taken place; my own 
mother was to have been converted, I myself was continually the object of at- 


tempts at conversion by Catholics (see pages 56-57), etc., etc. 


76 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


thought I was the last real human being left, and that the 
few human shapes whom I saw apart from myself—Professor 
Flechsig, some attendants, occasional more or less strange- 
looking patients—were only “fleeting-improvised-men” cre- 
ated by miracle. I pondered over such possibilities as that 
the whole of Flechsig’s Asylum or perhaps the city of Leipzig 
with it had been “dug out” and removed to some other celes- 
tial body, all of them possibilities which questions asked 
by the voices who talked to me seemed to hint at, as for 
instance whether Leipzig was still standing, etc. I regarded 
the starry sky largely, if not wholly, extinguished. I was not 
afforded the chance of correcting such notions. My bed- 
room window was closed up with a heavy wooden shutter 
at night so that the sight of the night sky was denied me. 
In day-time I saw over and beyond the walls of the 
Asylum only a few of the buildings immediately bordering 
on it. In the direction of the Bavarian Station I saw beyond 
the walls of the Asylum only a narrow strip of land, which 
looked quite strange to me and very different from the charac- 
ter of this district which I knew so well; at times one spoke 
of “a holy landscape.” The whistle of trains, which I could 
hardly have missed, I did not hear at all for some considerable 
time. Only the fact that the gaslights continued burning made 
me doubt whether Flechsig’s Asylum was in fact completely 
isolated, or it forced me to recognize some connection with 
the city of Leipzig, if I was not to assume that the Asylum had 
had its own special gasometer built. Further, I retain some 
recollections which I can only describe in a general way, to 
the effect that I felt as if I myself existed for some time 
also in a second, mentally inferior form. I must leave unde- 
cided whether something of this nature can occur through 
miracles, and whether it would have been possible for me 
to be placed again with part of my nerves into a second 
body. I can but repeat that I have recollections which seem 


7 





MEMOIRS 


to point to such a possibility. In this second inferior 
shape, of which I myself retain the conscious awareness of 
having had lesser intellectual powers, I was told that an- 
other Daniel Paul Schreber had existed before me who had 
been much better endowed intellectually than myself. As 
in my family pedigree, which I know extremely well, there 
had been no Daniel Paul Schreber before me, I think I am 
justified in taking this other Daniel Paul Schreber as re- 
ferring to myself while in full possession of my nerves. In 
the second inferior shape I must then, if I may use the 
expression, have quietly departed one day; I can recollect 
that in a room which does not tally with any one of the 
rooms known to me in Flechsig’s Asylum, I was lying in 
bed with the distinct feeling that my soul was slowly 
expiring, a state by the way which, apart from sad memories 
of my wife who was much in my mind during that time, 
had altogether the character of a painless and peaceful 
passing away. On the other hand there was a time when 
souls in nerve-contact with me talked of a plurality of heads 
(that is several individuals in one and the same skull) 
which they encountered in me and from which they shrank 
in alarm crying “For heaven’s sake—that is a human being 
with several heads.” I am fully aware how fantastic all this 
must sound to other people; and I therefore do not go so 
far as to assert that all I have recounted was objective reality; 
I only relate the impressions retained as recollections in my 
memory. 

As I said before, the innumerable visions I had in connec- 
tion with the idea that the world had perished were partly of 
a gruesome nature, partly of an indescribable sublimity. I 
will recall only a few. In one of them it was as though I were 
sitting in a railway carriage or in a lift driving into the depths 
of the earth and I recapitulated, as it were, the whole history of 


78 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


mankind or of the earth in reverse order; in the upper regions 
there were still forests of leafy trees; in the nether regions 
it became progressively darker and blacker. When temporarily 
I left the vehicle, I walked as though across a large cemetery 
where, coming upon the place where Leipzig’s inhabitants 
lay buried, I crossed my own wife’s grave. Sitting again in the 
vehicle I advanced only to a point 3; point 1, which was to 
mark the earliest beginning of mankind, I dared not enter. On 
the return drive the shaft collapsed behind me, continually 
endangering a “sun deity” who was in it too. In this connec- 
tion it was said that there had been two shafts (perhaps corre- 
sponding to the dualism of the realms of God?); when news 
came that the second shaft had also collapsed, it was thought 
that everything was lost. Another time I traversed the earth 
from Lake Ladoga to Brazil and, together with an attendant, 
I built there in a castle-like building a wall in protection of 
God's realms against an advancing yellow flood tide: I related 
this to the peril of a syphilitic epidemic. At another time I 
felt as if I myself were raised up to Blessedness, it was as 
though from the heights of heaven the whole earth were 
resting under a blue vault below me, a picture of sublime 
splendor and beauty; I heard some expression like “God-be- 
together-view” to describe this picture. In the case of other 
events I am doubtful whether they were only visions or at 
least in part real experiences. I remember that during the night 
1 frequently sat on the floor of my bedroom, clad only in a 
shirt (all articles of clothing had of course been taken from 
me) having left the bed following some inner impulse. My 
hands, which I set firmly on the floor behind my back, were 
perceptibly lifted up at times by bearlike shapes (black bears); 
other “black bears,” both greater and smaller, I saw sitting 
around me with glowing eyes. My bedclothes formed them- 
selves into so-called “white bears.” Through the peep-hole of 


79 





MEMOIRS 


my bedroom door I saw in a similar manner as recounted about 
our reigning King” in footnote 28, yellow men, under middle- 
size, appear now and then in front of the door of my bedroom, 
whom I had to be prepared to fight in some way. At times cats 
with glowing eyes appeared on the trees of the Asylum’s gar- 
den while I was still awake, that is to say in the late evening 
hours. Further, I recollect being for a time somewhere by the 
sea in a castle which had to be abandoned because of threaten- 
ing floods; from which, after a long, long time I returned to 
Flechsig’s Asylum, where I found myself all at once in the 
same circumstances as before. In front of my bedroom win- 
dows I saw in the early morning, when the shutters were 
opened, a dense forest, a few meters only removed from the 
window and consisting as far as I can remember mostly of 
birches and firs. The voices called it a “holy forest.” It had not 
the slightest resemblance to the garden of the University 
Nerve Clinic which is a new plantation started only in 1882, 
consisting mostly of rows of single trees alongside the paths. 
It goes without saying that such a forest, if it really ex- 
isted, could not possibly have sprung up in three or four 
months. My head was frequently surrounded by a shimmer of 
light owing to the massive concentration of rays, like the halo 
of Christ is pictured, but incomparably richer and brighter: the 
so-called “crown of rays.” The reflection of this crown of rays 
was so strong that one day when Professor Flechsig appeared at 
my bed with his assistant Dr. Quentin, the latter disappeared 
from my seeing eyes; the same happened another time with 





39. Although in footnote 37 above I remarked that I no longer doubted that this 
was only a dream vision, I must again on further consideration restrict this view. 
That I was standing by the peep-hole of my bedroom door is too distinct a recol- 
lection to attribute to a hallucination. I would, however, concede the possibility 
that what I presumed to have seen outside the door could have been a hallucina- 
tion [compare Kraepelin as quoted at the end of this chapter}. 


80 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


the attendant H. For a long time it was said that I was to 
remain under the protection of Cassiopeia, while the sun was 
assigned to a different destination, and was probably to be pre- 
served for her own planetary system and thus also for our 
earth. The power of attraction of my nerves was however so 
strong that this plan could not be carried out: the sun had to 
remain where I was or! myself had to be brought back again. 

It will be understandable that with such impressions, which 
I may attempt to interpret in a later chapter, I lived for years in 
doubt as to whether I was really still on earth or whether on 
some other celestial body. Even in the year 1895* I still consid- 
ered the possibility of my being on Phobos, a satellite of the 
planet Mars which had once been mentioned by the voices in 
some other context, and wondered whether the moon, which I 
sometimes saw in the sky, was not the main planet Mars. 

In the soul-language, during the time dealt with in this 
chapter, I was called “the seer of spirits,”*' that is, a man who 
sees, and is in communication with, spirits or departed souls. 
In particular, Flechsig’s soul used to refer to me as “the great- 
est seer of spirits of all centuries”; to which I, from a wider 
point of view, occasionally retorted, that one ought at least to 
speak of the greatest seer of spirits of all millennia. In fact since 
the dawn of the world there can hardly have been a case like 
mine, in which a human being entered into continual contact, 
that is to say no longer subject to interruption, not only with 
individual departed souls but with the totality of all souls and 
with God’s omnipotence itself. It is true that at first one still 
attempted to interrupt it; one then still differentiated “holy 
times,” that is times when nerve-contact or communication 


40. At that time the days too seemed considerably shorter; a watch, which could 
have helped rectify possibly erroneous ideas, was not at my disposal. 


41. I shall discuss below the designation “Prince of Hell,” which was applied to 
me later. 


81 





MEMOIRS 


with rays or talking of voices—after all only different expres- 
sions for one and the same phenomenon—were to occur and 
“unholy times” when it was intended to give up the communi- 
cation with rays. Soon, however, the enormous attraction of 
my nerves would not allow of any such pauses or interrup- 
tions; from then on there were only “holy times.” Seers of spir- 
its of an inferior kind may well have existed in greater or lesser 
numbers before my own case. To avoid going back as far as bib- 
lical events, I consider it very likely that in the cases of the 
Maid of Orleans, of the Crusaders in search of the Holy Lance 
at Antioch, or of the Emperor Constantine’s well-known vi- 
sion in hoc signo vinces which was decisive for the victory of 
Christianity: that in all these cases a transitory communica- 
tion with rays was established, or there was transitory divine 
inspiration. The same may possibly also be assumed in some 
cases of stigmatization of virgins; the legends and poetry of all 
peoples literally swarm with the activities of ghosts, elves, 
goblins, etc., and it seems to me nonsensical to assume that 
in all of them one is dealing simply with deliberate inventions 
of human imagination without any foundation in real fact. 
I noticed therefore with interest that according to Kraepelin’s 
TEXTBOOK OF PSYCHIATRY (5th Edition, Leipzig, 1896, 
p. 95 ff. and particularly p. 110 ff.) which had been lent to me 
(while I was occupied with this manuscript}, the phenomenon 
of being in some supernatural communication with voices had 
frequently been observed before in human beings whose nerves 
were in a state of morbid excitation.” I do not dispute that in 





42. In this connection Kraepelin’s remark on page 110 that those cases in which 
“the voices heard” have a supernatural character “are not infrequently accompa- 
nied by visual hallucinations” is very valuable for my own ideas. I think it proba- 
ble that in a considerable number of these cases it was a matter of real visions of 
the kind which I also have experienced, that is dream-images produced by rays, 
and which for that reason are very much more distinct than what is seen in ordi- 
nary dreams (compare Kraepelin, p. 107). On the other hand the total content of 


= 
82 





Personal experiences continued. Visions... 


many of these cases one may only be dealing with mere hallu- 
cinations, as which they are treated throughout the mentioned 
textbook. In my opinion science would go very wrong to desig- 
nate as “hallucinations” al] such phenomena that lack objec- 
tive reality, and to throw them into the lumber room of things 
that do not exist; this may possibly be justified in those hallu- 
cinations quoted by Kraepelin on page 108 ff., which are not 
connected with supernatural matters. I think it quite possible 
that some such cases were instances of genuine seers of spirits 
of an inferior grade in the earlier developed sense. This is not 
to deny the simultaneous existence of a morbid state of nerv- 
ous hyper-excitability, insofar as only the increased power of 
attraction of nerves caused by it enabled and facilitated com- 
munication with supernatural powers. It seems psychologi- 
cally impossible that J suffer only from hallucinations. After 
all, the hallucination of being in communication with God or 
departed souls can logically only develop in people who bring 
with them into their morbidly excited nervous state an already 
secure faith in God and the immortality of the soul. This, how- 
ever, was not so in my case, as mentioned at the beginning of 
this chapter. Even so-called spiritualist mediums may be con- 
sidered genuine seers of spirits of the inferior kind in this 


eee 


the present work will hardly show anything in my case which justifies speaking 
of “the inability of the patient to use earlier experiences to correct thoroughly and 
accurately his new ideas” {p. 146), or of “faulty judgment,” which Kraepelin 
(p. 145) says “invariably accompanies delusions.” I trust I have proved that I am not 
only not “controlled by fixed and previously formed ideas,” but that I also possess 
in full measure the "capacity to evaluate critically the content of consciousness 
with the help of judgment and deduction” (p. 146}. He who in Kraepelin’s sense 
(p. 146) understands “sound experience” simply as the denial of everything super- 
natural, would in my opinion lay himself open to the reproach of allowing himself 
to be led only by the shallow “rationalistic ideas” of the period of enlightenment 
of the 18th century, which after all are mostly considered to have been super- 


seded, particularly by theologians and philosophers, and also in science. 


83 





MEMOIRS 


sense, although in many cases self-deception and fraud may 
also play a part. Therefore one ought to beware of unscientific 
generalization and rash condemnation in such matters. If psy- 
chiatry is not flatly to deny everything supernatural and thus 
tumble with both feet into the camp of naked materialism, it 
will have to recognize the possibility that occasionally the 
phenomena under discussion may be connected with real hap- 
penings, which simply cannot be brushed aside with the catch- 
word “hallucinations.” 

After this digression I return to my real theme which I shall 
continue in the next chapter; I will touch on some other points 
concerning the supernatural which could not easily be dealt 
with in the above; I shall also discuss in particular the circum- 
stances of my external life during that time. 


84 
[tee 





Personal experiences continued; 
peculiar manifestations of 


illness. Visions 


FOR REASONS ALREADY mentioned I cannot give ex- 
act chronological data about the time between my wife’s last 
visits (middle of February 1894) and the end of my stay in 
Flechsig’s Asylum (middle of June 1894). I have only a few 
clues. I recollect that about the middle of March 1894 when 
communication with supernatural powers was well under 
way, a newspaper was put in front of me in which something 
like my own obituary notice could be read; I took this as a 
hint that I could no longer count on any possibility of a return 
to human society. I dare not decide whether what I saw ac- 
tually happened or whether it was a visual hallucination. I 
only retained the one impression, that if this and other oc- 
currences really were visions, there was method in them, i.e. 
that they were connected in a certain way which enabled me 
to realize what one had in store for me. This was the time 
when, as previously mentioned, I was kept in bed continu- 
ously day and night; whether for weeks and if so how many I 
cannot say. Round about the time of the Easter holidays—I 


85 





MEMOIRS 


cannot say when Easter was in 1894—an important change 
must have taken place in Professor Flechsig’s person. I heard 
that in these holidays he went on leave to the Palatinate or 
Alsace. In connection with this I had visions according to which 
Professor Flechsig had shot himself either in Weissenburg in 
Alsace or in the police prison in Leipzig; I also saw—in a dream 
vision—his funeral procession moving from his house towards 
the Thonberg (that is to say not really in the direction which 
one would expect according to the spatial relation between the 
University Nerve Clinic and St. John’s Cemetery). In other vi- 
sions he repeatedly appeared to me accompanied by a police- 
man or in conversation with his wife, which I witnessed by 
way of nerve-contact and where Professor Flechsig called him- 
self “God Flechsig” to his wife, so that she was inclined to 
think he was mad. I am, however, almost certain now that 
these visions did not conform to real happenings in the way I 
believed I had seen them. But I think it is permissible to inter- 
pret them as revelations of divine opinion on what ought to 
have happened to Professor Flechsig. However that may be, 
it is an actual or subjectively certain event from the distinct- 
ness of my recollection—whether other people can or cannot 
believe me—that about that time I had Professor Flechsig’s 
soul and most probably his whole soul temporarily in my body. 
It was a fairly bulky ball or bundle which I can perhaps best 
compare with a corresponding volume of wadding or cobweb, 
which had been thrown into my belly by way of miracle, pre- 
sumably to perish there. In view of its size it would in any case 
probably have been impossible to retain this soul in my belly, 
to digest it so to speak; indeed when it attempted to free itself 
I let it go voluntarily, being moved by a kind of sympathy, and 
so it escaped through my mouth into the open again. I have all 
the less reason to doubt the objective reality of this event, as 
in quite a number of other instances later I received souls or 
parts of souls in my mouth, of which I particularly remember 


4 
86 





Personal experiences continued... 


distinctly the foul taste and smell which such impure souls 
cause in the body of the person through whose mouth they 
have entered. 

These events were followed as far as I can remember by a 
period which the voices called the time of the first Divine 
Judgment. By coincidence I have retained a few data in my 
memory which must have been mentioned by somebody, ac- 
cording to which the first Divine Judgment embraced the 
period from the 2nd or 4th to the 19th of April 1894. The “first 
Divine Judgment” was then followed by a number of further 
Divine Judgments which, however, lagged behind the first in 
grandeur of impression. The “first Divine Judgment” was a 
series of continuous visions by day and by night, all based, if I 
may so express myself, on one common basic general idea. 
This was the idea that after a crisis dangerous for the existence 
of the realms of God which had arisen in the circles of the 
German people through the conflict between Professor Flechsig 
and myself, the German people, particularly Protestant Ger- 
many, could no longer be left with the leadership as God's cho- 
sen people, had perhaps even to to be excluded altogether 
when other “globes” (“inhabited planets?”) were occupied, un- 
less a champion appeared for the German people to prove their 
continued worth. At one time I myself was to be that cham- 
pion, at another a person chosen by me, and because of the in- 
sistence of the voices that talked to me in nerve-contact I 
named a number of outstanding men whom I deemed fit for 
such a struggle. Connected with the mentioned basic idea of 
the first Divine Judgment, was the advance of Catholicism, 
Judaism, and Slavism mentioned in the last chapter. I had a 
number of visions relating to this also, amongst which I saw 
the female wing of the University Nerve Clinic turned into a 
Nunnery or a Catholic Chapel, Sisters of Mercy sitting in the 
rooms under the Asylum’s roof, etc., etc. But then it was said 
that Catholicism would no longer do; after the death of the 


87 








MEMOIRS 


present Pope and of an intervening Pope Honorius, a further 
conclave could not be held because Catholics had lost their 
faith, etc. At the time I took all these to be actual historical 
events and therefore thought that a development of possibly 
several hundred years already belonged to the past. Naturally I 
do not hold this opinion any longer. Having resumed some 
contact with the outside world—naturally after the elapse of 
several years—through newspapers and letters, and having no- 
ticed nothing in the state of buildings in the Asylum and its 
neighborhood, nor in the condition of my old books, music and 
other useful articles, which had in the meantime been re- 
turned to me, which would tally with the assumption of a 
large gap in time having occurred in the history of mankind, I 
can now no longer refuse to acknowledge that viewed merely 
from outside everything has remained as of old. But whether a 
very profound inner change has taken place nevertheless will 
be discussed later. 

Of considerable influence on my range of ideas at the time 
was also certain information referring to what I was to become 
in a future transmigration of souls. I was cast in several roles 
consecutively: a “Hyperborian woman,” a “Jesuit Novice in Os- 
segg,”” a “Burgomaster of Klattau,’”’ “an Alsatian girl who had to 
defend her honor against a victorious French officer,” finally “a 
Mongolian Prince.” In all these predictions I thought I could dis- 
cern a certain connection with the overall picture furnished by 
the other visions. The fate of becoming a “Hyperborian woman” 
seemed a sign that the earth had lost so much heat that general 
glaciation had either occurred already or was imminent; apart 
from this there was talk that the sun had withdrawn as far as 
Jupiter. That I was destined to be a Jesuit Novice in Ossegg or a 
Burgomaster in Klattau or even an Alsatian girl in the situation 
specified above, I took as prophesies that Protestantism had 
either already succumbed to or was about to succumb to 
Catholicism, and the German people to their Roman and Slavic 


88 
L 





Personal experiences continued... 


neighbors; the prospect of my becoming a “Mongolian Prince” 
appeared to me as a sign that all Aryan peoples had proved them- 
selves unsuitable to defend the realms of God, and that a last 
refuge would now have to be taken with non-Aryan peoples. 

A fateful turn in the history of the earth and of mankind 
seemed to be marked by the events of one single day distinctly 
preserved in my memory, on which there was talk of the 
“clocks of the world” running out and at the same time a con- 
tinuous rich stream of rays towards my body accompanied 
by light phenomena of great splendor. I cannot say what was 
meant by the expression “the running out of the clocks of the 
world”; it was said that the whole of mankind would return 
but for two, namely myself and the Jesuit Father S., mentioned 
earlier in Chapter 5. From then on the conditions commenced 
which have since been called hundreds and thousands of times 
“the cursed play-with-human-beings.” I have reason to assume 
that since then, mankind and all its activities have only been 
artificially maintained by means of direct divine miracles, to 
an extent which the restrictions under which I live do not al- 
low me to survey fully.*”® This is certainly the case in my own 
surroundings: I feel a blow on my head simultaneously with 
every word spoken around me, with every approaching foot- 
step, with every railway whistle, with every shot fired by a 
pleasure steamer, etc.; this causes a variable degree of pain— 
more when God has withdrawn to a greater distance and less 
when He is nearby. Almost invariably I can foretell accurately 
when there is going to be such a manifestation of life by a 
human being near me, called “interference” and felt by me 
as a blow; namely always when the sensation of voluptuous- 
ness present in my body has gained such a strong power of 
attraction over the divine rays, that in order to be able to with- 
draw again such an “interference” is necessary. I cannot say up 


42B. Compare Preface. 


89 





MEMOIRS 


to what distance this incitement of people, if I may use that 
expression, by divine miracles takes place. I will return to the 
whole matter in greater detail later. 

With regard to the changes in the starry sky, it is now my 
opinion that news of the loss of this or that star or stellar con- 
stellation (compare Chapter 6, page 75) did not refer to the 
stars themselves—after all I still see them in the sky as be- 
fore—but only to the states of Blessedness accumulated under 
these stars. However, these have certainly been totally depleted, 
that is to say the nerves concerned have, through the power of 
attraction of my nerves, been absorbed into my body; in it they 
have taken on the character of female nerves of voluptuous- 
ness and apart from this have given my body a more or less 
feminine stamp; they have in particular given my skin a soft- 
ness peculiar to the female sex. On the other hand I am quite 
certain that God, who used to be an immense distance away, 
had been forced to draw nearer the earth, which thus became 
the direct and continual scene of divine miracles in a manner 
hitherto unknown. These miracles primarily concentrated on 
my person and surroundings. Later I will produce further proof 
of this statement over and above what has been said so far. 
Here I only want to remark that because the change thus 
wrought is contrary to the Order of the World it is connected 
with certain disadvantages even for God Himself, and may 
possibly be accompanied by other fateful consequences. Rays, 
after all, are accustomed to holy tranquility such as prevails 
on the highest mountain summits of the earth; therefore it 
must be disagreeable for them and in a way frightening to have 
suddenly to participate in all my auditory impressions, for in- 
stance the noise of railways.*? Further, I have reason to assume 
that from this date (or perhaps three months later, about which 





43. The expression for this which heard innumerable times, was “We do not like 
the thought of listening.” 


90 





Personal experiences continued... 


more below), the sending forth of the sun’s rays was taken over 
directly by God, more especially by the lower God (Ariman); 
the voices that talk to me now (since July 1894) identify him 
with the sun. The upper God (Ormuzd) kept himself at a 
greater, perhaps even still at a colossal distance; I see his pic- 
ture as a small sun-like disc, so tiny as to be almost a mere 
point, appear at short intervals on the nerves inside my head. 
Perhaps apart from our own planetary system which is lighted 
and warmed by the sun (Ariman}, a second has been success- 
fully maintained on which the continuity of creation is made 
possible by light and warmth emanating from the upper God 
(Ormuzd)}. But I consider it very doubtful at least, whether the 
population of all other celestial bodies belonging to other fixed 
stars on which organic life had developed, were not also 
doomed to perish.” 

The period during which I was continually kept in bed was 
followed, at the end of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum, by a time 
when I walked regularly in the garden. There I noticed a vari- 
ety of miraculous things. As already mentioned, I thought I 
saw two suns in the sky simultaneously. One day the whole 
garden was luxuriantly in bloom, a picture which did not fit 
my recollections of the first part of my illness when the garden 
of the University Nerve Clinic was quite bare; this phenome- 
non was called Flechsig’s miracle. At another time, in the 
pavilion in the center of the garden, there were a number of 
French-speaking ladies, a most remarkable occurrence in the 
male section of a Public Asylum. The few patients besides 





44. I have certain evidence which points to the possibility that in fact the light of 
all fixed stars is not their own, as our astronomy assumes, but as in the case of 
planets (as in all such matters, to be understood cum grano salis) is borrowed 
light (from God} (compare Chapter 1). The cardinal point is that there exists a 
controlling sun, of which our astronomy knows nothing. Compare the qualifying 


remark at the end of Postscript IV. 


91 





MEMOIRS 


myself who sometimes appeared in the garden, all gave a more 
or less bizarre impression; in one of them I once thought I rec- 
ognized a relative of mine, the husband of one of my nieces, 
now Professor Dr. F. in K. who looked shyly at me without say- 
ing a word. When I sat on a camp stool in the garden in a black 
coat with a black flap hat I felt like a marble guest who had re- 
turned from times long past into a strange world. 

In the meantime a most remarkable change occurred in my 
sleep. Whereas during the first months of the year 1894 I could 
only obtain sleep with the help of the strongest sleeping drugs 
(chloral hydrate) and not always then, some nights requiring 
additional injections of morphine, I took no sleeping drugs at 
all for several weeks at the end of my stay in Flechsig’s 
Asylum. I slept—though in part restlessly and always with 
more or less exciting visions—without any artificial help: my 
sleep had become the sleep of rays.** Rays, as already observed 
in footnote 31, also have the capacity to calm nerves and bring 
sleep. This will be the more readily believed because even ordi- 
nary sun rays have a similar though much weaker effect. Every 
psychiatrist knows that in patients suffering from a nervous 
illness the nervous excitement increases considerably at night, 
but improves in day-time, particularly later in the morning af- 
ter the influence of a few hours of sunlight. This result is in- 
creased immensely if, as in my case, the body receives divine 
rays direct. Only relatively few rays are then needed to pro- 
duce sleep; but all these rays must be united, since derived 


45. During my stay in Pierson’s Asylum and during the first part of my stay here 
(perhaps for one year) I never received sleeping drugs, as far as I can recall. Whether 
Iam mistaken in this could be shown by the entries in the drug register of this 
Asylum. For several years I have again received sleeping drugs regularly (mainly 
Sulfonal and Anylene hydrate alternately) and I take them without protest, al- 
though I consider they have no effect on my sleep. I am convinced that I would 
sleep equally well or badly without any artificial sleeping drugs as I do with them. 


92 
L 





Personal experiences continued... 


rays also exist (that is, led by impure or tested souls such as 
Flechsig’s, etc.) apart from divine rays proper. When this hap- 
pens I fall asleep immediately. When I observed this phenome- 
non towards the end of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum, I was 
extremely surprised because sleep could only be procured for 
me with the greatest difficulties; I only became clear about the 
reason for it in the course of time. 

All kinds of extraordinary symptoms of illness appeared in 
my body in the course of time, apart from the repeatedly 
mentioned changes in my sex organ. In discussing them I must 
return again to the idea of the end of the world mentioned 
in preceding chapters, which, from the visions I received, I 
thought either imminent or already past. Varying with the sug- 
gestions I received I formed different opinions about the man- 
ner in which it might have come about. In the first place I 
always thought of a decrease in the warmth of the sun through 
her moving farther away, and consequently a more or less gen- 
eralized glaciation. In the second place I thought of an earth- 
quake or suchlike; in this connection I want to mention that I 
once received news that the great earthquake of Lisbon in the 
year 1755 had occurred in connection with a seer of spirits, 
similar to my own case. I further thought it possible that news 
had spread that in the modern world something in the nature 
of a wizard had suddenly appeared in the person of Professor 
Flechsig“° and that I myself, after all a person known in wider 
circles, had suddenly disappeared; this had spread terror and 
fear amongst the people, destroying the bases of religion and 
causing general nervousness and immorality. In its train devas- 
tating epidemics had broken upon mankind. This last idea was 
particularly supported by the fact that for some time there was 
talk of two illnesses, leprosy and plague, hardly yet known 


46. The name of a French doctor Brouardel was also once mentioned to me, who 
was said to have imitated Professor Flechsig. 


93 





MEMOIRS 


in Europe, which were said to have spread among men and 
signs of which were visible on my own body. I do not want 
definitely to say the latter about leprosy; it could have been 
only a matter of small beginnings of this illness because I have 
no certain recollections of any single symptom of it. But I 
remember the names of the various forms in which leprosy 
was said to have occurred: Lepra orientalis, Lepra indica, 
Lepra hebraica and Lepra aegyptica. Being a layman in medi- 
cine I have never heard these terms before, nor do I know 
whether they correspond to the technical terms used for these 
types of the illness in medical science. I mention them here in 
order to disprove the assumption that it is all merely a matter 
of hallucinations dangled before me by my own nerves; for 
how could I possibly have hit upon these expressions without 
any knowledge of my own of the different varieties of this dis- 
ease? That I must have at least had some germs of leprosy is 
shown by the fact that for a long time I had to recite certain 
strange-sounding incantations, such as “I am the first leper 
corpse and I lead a leper corpse”*’—incantations which, as far 
as ! could understand, were connected with the fact that lepers 
had to consider themselves doomed to certain death; and had 
to help inter one another so as to provide for themselves an 
at least tolerable death. On the other hand I had on my body at 
various times fairly definite signs of the manifestations of 
plague. There were different varieties of plague: the blue plague, 
the brown plague, the white plague, and the black plague. The 
white plague was the most disgusting; the brown and the black 
plague were connected with the evaporations of the body, 
which in the former spread a glue-like and in the latter a soot- 
like smell; in the case of the black plague this was at times so 





47. As far as lremember I spoke them out aloud several times in the presence of 
the attendant R., who naturally responded only with a pitying smile. 


94 





Personal experiences continued... 


strong that it filled my whole room. I still noticed weak traces 
of the brown plague in the early part of my stay in this Asylum 
in the summer of 1894. The souls considered the plague a 
disease of nerves and hence a “holy disease”; I do not know 
whether it was in any way related to the occasional cases of 
bubonic plague of the present time. Nevertheless, even the 
plague did not develop to its full extent but remained confined 
to more or less marked indications. The reason for this was the 
fact that the manifestations of the disease were always subse- 
quently removed by pure rays. For one distinguished “searing” 
and “blessing” rays; the former were laden with the poison of 
corpses or some other putrid matter, and therefore carried 
some germ of disease into the body or brought about some 
other destructive effect in it. The blessing (pure) rays in turn 
healed this damage. 

Other things that happened on my body were still more 
closely connected with supernatural matters. It was men- 
tioned in earlier chapters that those rays (God’s nerves) which 
were attracted, followed only reluctantly, because it meant 
losing their own existence and therefore went against their 
instinct of self-preservation. Therefore one continually tried 
to stop the attraction, in other words to break free again from 
my nerves. The only absolutely effective way of doing this 
would have been to cure my nervous illness by procuring 
prolific sleep. But apparently one could not decide to do this, 
or at least not systematically, because it would have needed 
a self-denying sacrifice on the part of the rays immediately 
concerned, for which they had neither the capacity nor the 
necessary will power. 


48. The verb “to sear” ["sehren”] apparently originates from an old German root, 
which meant "to injure,” and is no longer used in modern German except for the 
compound word “unseared” [“unversehrt"|; it was, however, retained in the basic 
language. 


95 


MEMOIRS 


All other conceivable methods were therefore tried in the 
course of time, but from the nature of the matter they all 
proved thoroughly unsuitable. Always the main idea behind 
them was to “forsake” me, that is to say abandon me; at the 
time I am now discussing it was thought that this could be 
achieved by unmanning me and allowing my body to be prosti- 
tuted like that of a female harlot, sometimes also by killing me 
and later by destroying my reason (making me demented}. 

But with regard to the efforts to unman me it was soon 
found that the gradual filling of my body with nerves of 
voluptuousness (female nerves} had exactly the reverse effect, 
because the resulting so-called “soul-voluptuousness” in 
my body rather increased the power of attraction. Therefore 
“scorpions” were repeatedly put into my head, tiny crab- or 
spider-like structures which were to carry out some work of 
destruction in my head. These had the nature of souls and 
therefore were talking beings; they were distinguished accord- 
ing to their place of origin as “Aryan,’*’ and “Catholic” scorpi- 
ons; the former were somewhat bigger and stronger. However, 
these scorpions regularly withdrew from my head without 
doing me harm, when they perceived the purity of my nerves 
and the holiness of my purpose—this was one of the innumer- 
able triumphs which I have often experienced since then 
in a similar way. Just because the holiness of my purpose 
exerted too great a power of attraction on the souls, attempts 
were also made to falsify my mental individuality in all sorts 
of ways. “Jesuits,” that is to say departed souls of former 





49. The expression “Aryan” (" Aryan” is another name for the Indo-Germanic peo- 
ples) was in general much used at that time; there was also an “Aryan” state of 
Blessedness, etc. By and large the expression was used to denote the leaning of a 
great part of the souls towards German nationalism; they wanted to retain for the 
German people the place of God’s chosen people, in contrast to the Catholicizing 
and Slavicizing efforts of other souls. 





Personal experiences continued... 


Jesuits, repeatedly tried to put into my head a different “deter- 
minant nerve,” which was to change my awareness of my own 
identity; the inner table of my skull was lined with a different 
brain membrane“ in order to extinguish my memory of my 
own ego. All this without any permanent effect. Finally at- 
tempts were made to blacken my nerves by miraculously plac- 
ing the blackened nerves of other {deceased} human beings into 
my body, believing presumably that the blackness (impurity) 
of these nerves would be imparted to mine. Concerning these 
blackened nerves, I wish to mention a few names, the bearers 
of which were all said to have been in “Flechsig’s hell,” which 
made me assume that Professor Flechsig must have some 
power of disposal over these nerves. Among them was a cer- 
tain Bernhard Haase—his name was by coincidence identical 
with that of a distant relative of mine—a bad sort, who was 
supposed to have committed some crime, a murder or such- 
like; further a certain R., a fellow-student and member of my 
Students’ Union, who had gone to America because he had not 
made good and had led a rather dissolute life, and as far as I 
know was killed there in the War of Independence in 1864 or 
1865;* finally a certain Julius Emil Haase who, despite his 
blackened nerves, gave the impression of a very honorable per- 
son. Presumably at the time of the Frankfurt attentat he was 
a senior member of the Students’ Union and then became a 


49A. As alayman in medicine I had also not heard of a brain membrane before, 
but was informed of this expression by the voices after I had appreciated (felt) this 


phenomenon myself. 


50. The above-mentioned R. is one of the instances from which I gather Professor 
Flechsig’s powers as Governor of one of God’s provinces [compare pages 57 and 58 
above] must have stretched as far as America. The same seems to have applied to 
England; it was repeatedly stated that he had taken “sixteen English rays” from 
their leader, an English Bishop, which were however only entrusted to him on the 
express condition that they were to be used solely in a war for the independence 


of Germany. 


97 


MEMOIRS 


medical practitioner in Jena, if I heard correctly. Particularly 
interesting was that the soul of this Julius Emil Haase was 
even still able to give me certain medical advice by virtue of 
its scientific experience during its life; I want to add here that 
up to a point the same applied to my father’s soul. The pres- 
ence of these blackened nerves in my body caused no lasting 
effect; they vanished in time without altering the condition of 
my nerves. 

I could relate still more miraculous events from the time of 
my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum. I could tell of happenings which 
make me believe that popular belief that will-o’-the-wisps are 
departed souls is true in many cases if not all; I could tell of 
wandering clocks, that is to say souls of departed heretics, said 
to have been preserved for centuries under glass in medieval 
cloisters (here too there is an undercurrent of something like a 
soul murder}, who announced their survival by a vibration 
connected with an infinitely monotonous and doleful hum- 
ming noise (I myself received this impression by way of nerve- 
contact}, etc., etc. To avoid becoming too discursive” I will 
now close my report about my experiences and memories of 
the time of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum. 


51. Another consideration is that it is mainly a question of visions, the pictures of 
which I have in my head, but the description of which in words is extremely diffi- 


cult, in part absolutely impossible. 


98 





Personal experiences while in 
Dr. Pierson’s Asylum. 


“Tested souls” 


IT |S EVIDENT from what I have related above that dur- 
ing the last months of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum I stood 
in dread of certain dangers which, since communication with 
rays had become indissoluble, seemed to threaten my body and 
my soul—dangers which had in fact already been partially real- 
ized. The most disgusting was the idea that my body, after the 
intended transformation into a female being, was to suffer 
some sexual abuse, particularly as there had even been talk for 
some time of my being thrown to the Asylum attendants for 
this purpose. Moreover the dread of “being forsaken” played a 
major role, so that every night I went to bed in my padded cell 
I doubted whether the door would open again at all in the 
morning; to be torn from the cell in the middle of the night in 
order to be drowned was another terrifying possibility which 
occupied my imagination, indeed was forced on to me by what 
was said by the voices. 

Therefore, when early one morning (perhaps mid-June 1894} 
three attendants appeared in my cell with a suitcase in which 


99 


MEMOIRS 


were packed my few belongings, and told me that I was to get 
ready to leave the Asylum, my only reaction at first was a 
feeling of liberation from a place in which an infinite number 
of perils threatened me. I had no idea where the journey was 
to lead, nor did I think it worth inquiring, because I did not 
think these attendants were human beings at all, but only 
“fleeting-improvised-men.”” The journey’s goal left me indif- 
ferent; I felt only that I could not fare worse anywhere in the 
world than I had fared in Flechsig’s Asylum; any change could 
therefore only be an improvement. Accompanied by the three 
attendants I left in a cab for Dresden Station, without seeing 
Professor Flechsig again. The streets of Leipzig through which 
we drove, particularly Augustusplatz, seemed strangely for- 
eign; as far as I remember they were completely deserted. This 
may have been because it was so early in the morning with 
its peculiar light; probably I caught the passenger train leaving 
about 5:30 a.m. Having lived for months among miracles, I 
was inclined to take more or less everything I saw for a mira- 
cle. Accordingly I did not know whether to take the streets 
of Leipzig through which I traveled as only theater props, per- 
haps in the fashion in which Prince Potemkin is said to have 
put them up for Empress Catherine II of Russia during 
her travels through the desolate country, so as to give her the 
impression of a flourishing countryside. At Dresden Station, 
it is true, I saw a fair number of people who gave the impres- 
sion of being railway passengers. But if it should be thought 
that my ideas of a vast change having come over mankind 
should have been thoroughly revised by my drive to the 
Station and the subsequent railway journey, I must observe 
that no sooner had I reached my new destination, than a 


52. I had also had a vision about the above-mentioned R., according to which he 
was said to have taken his life on the way to “Uebelessen” (Thonberg near 
Leipzig). 


Ls eee 
100 
| 





Personal experiences while... 


new world of miracles surrounded me with such extraordinary 
visions that the impressions of my journey soon faded, or at 
least I had doubts of how I should interpret them. The railway 
journey proceeded with uncommon speed for a slow train or 
so I thought at the time; my mood was such that I would 
have been ready any moment {had this been demanded) to 
throw myself on the railway line or to jump into the water 
while crossing the Elbe. After a journey of several hours we 
left the train at a Station which, I heard later, was supposed 
to have been Coswig; there we entered a cab which in about 
half an hour drove us to my new destination. Again, as I only 
learned several years later, it was supposed to have been Dr. 
Pierson’s Private Asylum for the Insane; at the time I came 
to know the Asylum only by the name of “Devil’s Kitchen” 
which the voices indicated to me. The senior attendant of 
the Asylum who had come to fetch me took his place on the 
coach-box; his name, as far as I can remember, was Marx, and 
I will shortly have more to say about him being somehow 
identical with von W.’s soul. The Asylum itself, a relatively 
small building in beautiful grounds, gave the impression of be- 
ing quite new. Everything seemed only just finished; not even 
the enamel paint on the stairs was fully dry. The three atten- 
dants from Flechsig’s Asylum who had accompanied me soon 
retired and I did not see them again. I had time to look round 
my new abode.*? 


53. Why I was taken to Pierson’s Asylum—temporarily, for 7 to 14 days—is still 
inexplicable when I try to view these things in a human, natural light. My trans- 
fer from the University Clinic in Leipzig to the present Country Asylum (Son- 
nenstein) once decided upon, it would after all have been far simpler to set it in 
motion direct, without a stay somewhere else in between; if suitable rooms were 
not ready for my reception at Sonnenstein my stay at the Leipzig Asylum would 
have been better prolonged by a week or two, instead of entrusting a fairly danger- 
ous patient, as I certainly was at the time, to the care of a Private Asylum. 


MEMOIRS 


I will try to give a ground plan and sketch of Dr. Pierson’s 
Asylum (the “Devil’s Kitchen”) also, because I thought at the 
time, and still think, that I can draw certain conclusions from 
the lay-out. The building where I was admitted had as far as I 
can remember only one story, that is to say it consisted of a 
ground floor and first floor; at some distance, separated by the 
grounds, was a second building which was supposed to repre- 
sent the female house of the Asylum. The ground plan of the 
upper story of the house into which I moved looked something 
like this: 


GROUNDS 





The ground floor was divided up slightly differently; it con- 
tained, among others, a bathroom, and otherwise consisted of a 
few big rooms; in the direction of the courtyard a door and a 
few steps led to the latter. 

The time I spent in Pierson’s Asylum was when the wildest 
mischief through miracles was carried on, because all mira- 
cles, not creative for permanent and sensible purposes but 
mere aimless playing about, must be considered mischief even 


nee aL 
102 
eed 





Personal experiences while... 


if they provide the rays with temporary entertainment. At no 
other time were “fleeting-improvised-men” set down so ex- 
travagantly as then. The reasons for this statement will be- 
come apparent from what follows. 

I will start by first describing the circumstances of my out- 
ward life and how they developed in my new abode. I had no 
separate living-room; room b in the above sketch served as my 
bedroom. Day-time I usually spent in the common living-room 
or dining-room c, in which there was a constant coming and 
going of other presumed patients. In an attendant apparently 
employed for my special supervision I thought I recognized, 
perhaps because of an accidental likeness, the attendant of the 
Country Court who used to bring the files to my home during 
my six weeks of professional activity in Dresden; as I did not 
learn his name I will call him the “attendant of the Country 
Court.” I naturally considered him, as all the other human 
shapes I saw, only as “fleetingly-improvised.” Even now I can- 
not convince myself that this idea was wrong, because I defi- 
nitely remember for instance, seeing more than once during 
those very light June mornings, this “attendant of the Country 
Court” who slept in a separate bed in my room, becoming one 
with his bed; that is to say I saw him gradually disappear, so 
that his bed was empty, without my having noticed that he got 
up or opened the door to leave the room. Further, this “atten- 
dant of the Country Court” had the habit of occasionally 
dressing in my clothes. A gentleman appeared occasionally— 
mostly in the evening hours—who was supposed to be the 
Medical Director of the Asylum and who again reminded me, 
because of a certain likeness, of Dr. O. in Dresden, whom I had 
consulted; this gentleman always appeared accompanied by 
the senior attendant, who will be described in more detail 
later, and I must now presume that it was Dr. Pierson; his con- 
versation was regularly confined to a few empty words. I only 
once entered the garden of the Asylum, and that on the day of 


MEMOIRS 


my arrival when I walked in it for about an hour. I saw there 
several ladies, among them Mrs. W., the wife of a Pastor in Fr., 
and my own mother, also several gentlemen, among them the 
Councillor of the Country Court K., of Dresden, with an un- 
gainly enlarged head. Even if I wanted to try to convince my- 
self now that I had only been deceived by fleeting similarities 
of external appearances, this would not suffice to explain to 
me the impressions I had at the time; I could understand such 
likeness occurring in two or three instances but not the fact 
that, as I will show, almost all the patients in the Asylum, that 
is to say at least several dozen human beings, looked like per- 
sons who had been more or less close to me in my life. 

After that one walk in the garden proper the only time I was 
in the open air—for one to two hours every morning and after- 
noon—was in the above-mentioned courtyard or “pen”; this 
was about fifty yards square, shut in by walls, a desolate sand- 
pit without bush or shrub, with nothing to sit on but one or 
two wooden benches of the most primitive kind. Into this pen 
were crammed 40 to 50 human forms at the same time as my- 
self; judging from their appearances it was and is impossible 
for me to believe that they were really the patient population 
of a Private Asylum for the Insane. In such Private Asylums 
one finds as a rule only well-to-do patients, and only excep- 
tionally are really demented patients or idiots to be found 
there. But here I saw only extraordinary figures, among them 
fellows in linen overalls covered in soot. Almost all of them 
were silent and practically motionless; only a few used occa- 
sionally to utter certain fragmentary sounds, among them a 
gentlemen I thought was the Country Court Councillor W., 
who shouted continuously for a Miss Hering. During my peri- 
ods in the “pen” or even inside the Asylum I never heard any- 
thing among these supposed patients even faintly resembling a 
sensible conservation such as is carried on in Private Asylums 
among milder patients. They entered the common-room one 


r 
104 





Personal experiences while... 


after another, silently, and equally silently left it again, appar- 
ently without taking any notice of one another. At the same 
time I repeatedly witnessed that some of them changed heads 
during their stay in the common-room; that is to say, without 
leaving the room and while I was observing them, they sud- 
denly ran about with a different head. As far as I could observe 
there was no relationship whatever between the size of the 
Asylum and the number of patients whom I saw in the pen and 
in the common-room, partly simultaneously (particularly in 
the former}, partly consecutively. It was then, and still is, my 
conviction that it was impossible for all the 40 to 50 people 
who were crammed into the pen simultaneously with me and 
who pushed towards the door of the house again every time 
the signal was given to return, to have found sleeping accom- 
modation in it for the night; I therefore thought and still think 
that some of them must have remained outside all the time, 
there to dissolve in a short time like the “fleeting-improvised- 
men” which indeed they were. 

At the most there were only four or six beds on the first 
floor of the Asylum where I lived; the ground floor, through 
which I had to pass each time I went out to the pen and re- 
turned from it, teemed with human forms most of the time, 
but could hardly have provided accommodation for the night 
for more than 10 or 12 human beings, even had there been a 
communal dormitory. And yet all these 40 to 50 visitors to the 
pen must have been more or less demented, because milder pa- 
tients, harmless to their environment, would hardly have been 
crammed into this desolate pen, so depriving them of the 
pleasure of a walk in the Asylum garden which actually ex- 
isted—the above-mentioned parklands. Of the shapes I remem- 
ber being in the pen, I wish to name Dr. Rudolph J. from 
Leipzig, a cousin of my wife, who had shot himself as early as 
1887; the likeness, except for being slightly smaller, was so 
striking that I had no doubt whatever of his identity. This 


MEMOIRS 


person ran about continuously with a bundle of newspapers 
or other papers, which he used only to provide himself with 
something soft to sit upon on the hard wooden benches; also 
there was the Senior Prosecutor B., who remained immobile in 
a bent, devout, almost praying posture. The voices called some 
of those present the shapes in which “with regard to the 
Determining fourth and fifth” (to be supplemented by a word 
like “dimension” which I did not clearly understand)* and his 
subterranean antipodes (the fellows in linen overalls) covered 
with soot were “set down” (embodied). Inside the Asylum I 
saw among others Dr. W. in two different shapes, one more 
perfect and the other more degenerate, the latter having been 
allotted him in the transmigration of souls; President of the 
Senate of a Court Dr. F, the Country Court Councillor Dr. M., 
the Lawyer W. from Leipzig (a friend of my youth), my nephew 
Fritz, etc. In another gentleman who apparently occupied room 
f beyond the staircase of the above ground plan, and whom I 
thought I had seen before when I arrived at Coswig Station 
walking up and down as if he were looking for somebody, ! 
thought I recognized Mr. von O. of Mecklenburg, whose fleet- 
ing acquaintance I had made during a holiday at Warnemtinde. 
His room was hung with very peculiar pictures (on paper) 
mostly colored red, and was filled by that singular smell which 
I called the Devil’s stench in Chapter 1. Once I noticed from 
the window my father-in-law on the drive leading to the 
Asylum; about that time I also had a number of his nerves in 
my body and from their behavior in conversation by way of 





54. “With regard to the Determining” was another designation for God’s omnipo- 
tence which was given to the “anterior column leaders,” that is to say some sub- 
ordinate instances of God’s omnipotence {compare footnote 19}. The attached 
numbers signified the stages upwards. The “anterior column leader” who is men- 
tioned later, also called “below measure,” carried the number 14; I thought him 
somehow identical with the Director of this Asylum. The highest number which | 
remember having heard later, was 480. 





Personal experiences while... 


nerve-contact I clearly recognized my father-in-law’s nature. I 
also saw repeatedly a number of persons (4-5), once even a few 
ladies, entering the corner rooms a and d of the above ground 
plan, after they had passed the common-room; they must then 
have vanished in those rooms.* They had, as the ground plan 
shows, no other exit than through the common-room. When, 
after an interval during which I did not leave the common- 
room, I looked through the open door into those rooms, there 
was either nobody left in them or only a single person in the 
corner room d, the person whom I call Dr. W. lying in bed with 
all sorts of peculiar adornments of silken ribbons, etc., with 
which he had “miraculously provided himself” as it was said 
at the time. 

Miracles affected not only human forms but also lifeless 
objects. However skeptical I try to be now in scrutinizing my 
recollections, I cannot erase certain impressions from my mem- 
ory, in which I saw even articles of clothing on the bodies of 
human beings being transformed, as well as food on my plate 
during meals (for instance pork into veal or vice versa), etc. One 
day—in bright daylight—I saw from my window directly in 
front of the walls of the building where I lived, a magnificent 
portico arise, just as if the whole building were going to be 
transformed into a fairy palace; later the image vanished, sup- 
posedly because the completion of the intended divine miracle 
was prevented by Flechsig’s and von W.’s counter-miracles; the 
picture still stands out very clearly in my memory. 

The senior attendant of the Asylum deserves special men- 
tion. On the very day of my arrival the voices said that he was 
identical with my fellow lodger v. W.; he was said to have given 
false evidence about me in some State inquiry, either on pur- 
pose or through carelessness, and particularly to have accused 





55. This was repeatedly accompanied by the peculiar rattle connected with the 
“taking away” (dissolving themselves) of the “fleeting-improvised-men.” 


MEMOIRS 


me of masturbation; as punishment for this he had now to be 
my servant in the form of a fleeting-improvised-man.* 

It seems impossible that I should spontaneously have ar- 
rived at such ideas myself, because I never had any disagree- 
ments with or harbored any grudge against Mr. v. W. with 
whom in any case I had only the honor of a fleeting acquain- 
tance. The voices continuously tried to incite me against this 
senior attendant; on my very first day it was demanded that I 
address him as “W.,” thereby insulting him by omitting his 
title; at first I did not at all want to, but finally did just once to 
get rid of the pressing voices. On a later occasion I even boxed 
his ears; I cannot remember my immediate incentive, but I do 
know that, as he had made some unfair demand on me, the 
voices challenged and mocked me for my apparent lack of 
manly courage until at last I struck him. I have already men- 
tioned in Chapter | that on certain occasions I saw on the sen- 
ior attendant’s face and hands the red color peculiar to Devils; 
what I shall relate later leaves me in no doubt that he really 
had v. W’'s nerves, at least in part. 

I did not undertake any mental or physical occupation dur- 
ing my short stay in Dr. Pierson’s Asylum (”Devil’s Kitchen”); 
my attention was taken up almost all day entirely by the con- 
versation of the voices and by amazement at the miraculous 
things which were happening around me. In retrospect it 
seems very striking now that there was no such thing as a 


56. Such forms of punishment—a rather moderate form if there is any truth in it 
at all—seemed to be favored by souls. I heard it said several times that Professor 
Flechsig would have to serve me in the form of a “fleeting-improvised” char- 
woman in expiation of the wrong he had done me. It seems that some mildly 
mocking humiliation was to be the lot of those who had sinned in life; this ac- 
counts for the expression “rascal” which was applied to the fleeting-improvised- 
man who had to serve the Eternal Jew, and which therefore was also applied to 
the attendants of the present Asylum in the first part of my stay, particularly 
to the attendant M. 





Personal experiences while... 


communal meal, as far as I remember having had meals there, 
a table was laid for me in the common-room, apart from my- 
self one or two other patients at the most used to eat there too. 
I remember once that I threw the dish (fried sausage) out of the 
window, perhaps breaking the window pane in the act; but I 
cannot clearly remember my motive for this. 

Naturally the souls with whom I was in nerve-contact in 
Flechsig’s Asylum followed me to my new abode as they had 
done on my journey there: above all Flechsig’s soul itself, try- 
ing to intensify the battle it had started against God’s omnipo- 
tence, had formed a kind of party-following of more or less 
friendly souls whom it pulled along. Belonging to this party- 
following, apart from the “Cassiopeia brothers” mentioned in 
Chapter 5, there was a group designated at the time as “the 
Advancing”; it consisted of Daniel Furchtegott Flechsig’s soul 
(which existed in two shapes), and those of the Senior District 
Court Councillor G. and an anterior column leader previously 
belonging to God’s omnipotence, “with regard to the Deter- 
mining first,” a sort of renegade who had submitted to 
Flechsig’s influence. The “suspended under Cassiopeia” (that 
is souls formerly members of the Students’ Corps Saxonia) dis- 
appeared during my stay in Pierson’s Asylum; they were 
pushed back into their graves “by a strong hand,” an event I 
witnessed with my mind's eye, hearing at the same time the 
wailing (a kind of whimpering) with which the souls accompa- 
nied this event which they naturally did not wish for, because 
it meant the loss of that state of Blessedness which they had 
surreptitiously attained. A number of other souls appeared in 
their place; this resulted preponderantly from a partition of 
souls—an abuse presumably first introduced by Flechsig’s soul. 
Even if the physical possibility of a partition of souls men- 
tioned in footnote 9 Chapter 1 had existed previously, it is 
hardly likely that as long as the Order of the World was intact, 
use would have been made of a measure so humiliating to 


MEMOIRS 


human feeling. There could have been no good reason to allow 
the soul of a human being to ascend to a state of Blessedness 
with a certain number of its nerves, while the other part 
was placed in a position of punishment. I am inclined rather 
to believe that the natural unity of the human soul used to be 
respected; thus in the case of nerves too greatly blackened, 
to cleanse all of which would have required too great an 
expenditure of pure rays, only a small number of nerves was 
cleansed (this meant that a particular human soul was granted 
the state of Blessedness for a shorter time only, compare 
Chapter 1), the rest simply being left to rot in the grave. But, as 
mentioned, Flechsig’s soul introduced the partition of souls 
mainly in order to occupy the whole heavenly vault with parts 
of souls so that divine rays, following some power of attrac- 
tion, met resistance on all sides. The picture which I have 
in my mind is extremely difficult to express in words; it ap- 
peared that nerves—probably taken from my body—were strung 
over the whole heavenly vault, which the divine rays were not 
able to surmount, or which at least constituted a mechanical 
obstacle similar to the way a besieged fortress is protected by 
walls and moats against the onrush of the enemy. For this pur- 
pose Flechsig’s soul had split into a great number of soul parts, 
of which there existed for a time about 40 to 60, amongst them 
many tiny ones presumably consisting of but a single nerve; 
two bigger soul parts were called the “superior Flechsig” and 
the “middle Flechsig’; the former used temporarily to be 
marked out by greater purity because of divine rays which he 
had appropriated but which usually did not last long. Similarly 
there were later also 20 to 30 von W.’s soul parts, even a joint 
v. W.-Flechsig’s soul, to which I might refer again. 

The causes which led to the appearance of von W.’s soul in 
the sky (besides Flechsig's) I can only guess, though probably 
with some accuracy. All “tested” (Flechsig’s, etc.) souls owe 
their existence fundamentally to the power of attraction which 


5 
110 
rs) 





Personal experiences while... 


had developed in my body through excessive over-excitement 
of my nerves; that is to say I was for them only a means to an 
end to capture the divine rays brought nearer by the power of 
attraction with which they then adorned themselves, like a 
peacock with strange feathers, so attaining the gift of miracles, 
etc. For this reason it was important for them to have a certain 
power of control over my body. While I was in the Leipzig 
Asylum this power of control seems to have been exerted by 
Flechsig’s soul in combination with the real Professor Flechsig, 
still present as a human being (or a “fleeting-improvised-man”; 
what he actually was at the time I must leave undecided). This 
influence ceased with my transfer to Dr. Pierson’s Asylum 
(“Devil’s Kitchen”); the actual power over my body then fell to 
the staff of that Asylum, particularly to the senior attendant. 
This seems to have caused Flechsig’s soul to draw up to heaven, 
perhaps even to a state of Blessedness, some of the nerves 
taken from the senior attendant, but in reality v. W.’s nerves, 
in order to regain his lost influence over me through these 
nerves and through their influence on the senior attendant. 

At the beginning it was said that only three v. W.’s nerve fil- 
aments were involved; but these having once obtained aware- 
ness of their heavenly existence and at the same time of their 
gift of miracles, soon complemented themselves into one fairly 
substantial soul by drawing up a larger number of other von W.'s 
nerves (out of the grave as I had to assume at the time}. Natu- 
rally these too were impure nerves; in other words a second 
“tested soul” was now in the sky, inspired only by a selfish 
striving for self-preservation and lust for power contrary to the 
Order of the World and opposing God's omnipotence; to this 
purpose it abused my nerves’ power of attraction on divine 
rays. In general it recognized the leadership of Flechsig's soul, 
which remained as before the spiritual leader of the whole re- 
bellion against God’s omnipotence; in some respects however 
it maintained a certain independence in contra-distinction to 


MEMOIRS 


the other souls which formed Flechsig’s following. For exam- 
ple, as already mentioned, it permitted an extensive partition 
of souls, but in other respects went its own way. 

My position was made considerably more difficult through 
the addition of this second “tested soul”; for this soul also 
started to work miracles in my body which in part were of a 
highly damaging nature, about which I will say more later. On 
the other hand it also provoked some amusing effects, even 
lending to my otherwise gloomy existence, if I may put it like 
this, a touch of the comic. That these nerves which had thus 
attained a sort of heavenly power were really von W.'s seems to 
me beyond doubt; for! repeatedly conversed with von W.'s soul 
about its recollections from life, particularly about its student 
days in the Students’ Corps Misnia, right down to the well- 
known waiter B. in the Public House Gosen at Eutritzsch near 
Leipzig. At times it was highly amusing to observe how both 
souls—Flechsig’s and von W.'s—in spite of their alliance against 
God’s omnipotence, mutually repelled one another, because of 
the professorial arrogance of the one and the pride of nobility 
of the other. Von W.’s soul, full of “von W.’s House- and 
Primogenitor-Order” which it was going to establish in heaven 
and on which it was going to found its “world domination,” 
was fundamentally unsympathetic to the soul of the national- 
liberal Professor Flechsig and at times would hear no good of it 
at all. The latter in turn, possessed by its intellectual superior- 
ity, looked on von W.’s soul, with some contempt. Von W.'s 
soul showed other distinctly aristocratic traits, and temporar- 
ily paid me more respect, as when it noticed that I brought the 
fork to my mouth with my left hand; it showed a particular in- 
terest in a well-kept table d’héte, and had also a greater orga- 
nizing talent than Flechsig’s soul, insofar as it was more 
economical with the rays it had appropriated, therefore usually 
appeared more radiant, and for some time it kept a proper “mag- 
azine of rays" (I could still indicate where it was in the sky]. 





Personal experiences while... 


I want to add a little more about my other supernatural im- 
pressions in Pierson’s Asylum. So-called Moonshine-Blessedness 
fluttered towards me in long flights (the image is hard to de- 
scribe, one might perhaps compare it with so-called gossamer, 
not in single threads but in a kind of denser texture}; this was 
to represent the female state of Blessedness. It was of two 
kinds, one flatter and one more robust; perhaps the former can 
be regarded as Child-Blessedness. Further information was added 
to the idea of the end of the world mentioned in previous chap- 
ters, in how far a revival of the created world was possible; at 
one time it was said it would only extend to the fishes, at an- 
other as far as the lower mammals, etc. I must leave undecided 
how far this information was based only on apprehension for 
the future or whether it was founded on reality. But I must 
assume that on a distant star, probably by using part of my 
nerves, the attempt was actually made to create a new human 
world (“new human beings out of Schreber’s spirit,” as it has 
been called innumerable times since then, mostly meant in a 
mocking spirit). It remains a mystery how the necessary time 
for this was to be found; I thought then and automatically still 
think of the ideas developed in du Prel's work quoted in 
footnote 36 (in the Appendix as far as I remember) according 
to which a difference in space also means a difference in 
time. These “new human beings out of Schreber’s spirit’”— 
physically of a much smaller stature than our earthly human 
beings—were said to have already achieved a fairly remarkable 
degree of culture, to have kept small cattle proportionate to 
their own size, etc. I myself was said to have received divine 
veneration as their “National Saint” so to speak, as if my phys- 
ical posture (particularly in the “pen” of Pierson’s Asylum) 
were of some significance for their faith. Those of their souls 
which had ascended to a state of Blessedness after death were 
said to have attained to rays of fairly substantial vigor. 

I assume that there must have been some truth in the 


MEMOIRS 


matter because at that time I had the “God” or “Apostle” of 
these little people—that is to say presumably the aggregate of 
the rays which were derived from their states of Blessedness— 
as a soul in my body, more specifically in my belly.®’ This little 
"God" or “Apostle” surpassed all other souls by virtue of a 
practical turn of mind—a fundamental trait of my own charac- 
ter (I cannot suppress some self-praise here}|—so that in a way 
I recognized in him flesh of my flesh and blood of my blood. 
But in order to mislead me a falsified counterpart was put up 
against this little “God” or “Apostle’—just as in many other 
cases, for instance respecting my father’s soul, the souls of the 
Jesuits, etc. Usually I noticed these falsifications very quickly, 
because it was easy to distinguish the true from the false by 
the character of the respective souls. There was also much talk 
at that time of a “law for the restoration of the rays,” that 
is to say of the principle—of which the “little people out of 
Schreber’s spirit” would have been an example—that new rays 
come forth from the faith of departed human beings. This idea 
seems to accord with what has been said above in footnote 11, 
Chapter 1, about the origin of the “forecourts of heaven.” 

Flechsig’s soul was at that time leader of two “suns,” in- 
cluding the one from which daylight emanated. The picture I 
have in my mind of how the leading soul was situated, as it 
were, behind the sun, is impossible to describe in words. Von 
W’s soul also was to be trusted with the leadership of a sun, 
but in general it showed little inclination towards it. 


57. I observed here too the otherwise frequent phenomenon that friendly souls 
always tended more towards the region of my sexual organs (of the abdomen, etc.}, 
where they did little or no damage and hardly molested me, whereas inimical 
souls always aspired towards my head, on which they wanted to inflict some 
damage, and sat particularly on my left ear in a highly disturbing manner. 


Et 
114 
4 





Transfer to Sonnenstein. 
Changes in the contact 
with rays. “The writing- 
down-system”; “Tying- 
to-celestial-bodies” 


ONE FINE DAY (after a total stay of 8-14 days) I was taken 
from Dr. Pierson’s Asylum, “the Devil’s Kitchen,” to this 
Country Asylum Sonnenstein near Pirna—I later learnt that it 
was on the 29th of June 1894. I do not know the reasons for my 
transfer; at the time I felt I had to connect it with the tremen- 
dously increased influence of von W.'s soul during the last days 
of my stay in the Devil’s Kitchen, which had to be counter- 
balanced in some way. I had a warm bath before I left—the 
only one in Dr. Pierson’s Asylum. I then traveled by cab (as on 
my way there) accompanied by the “Country Court attendant” 
to Coswig Station; having drunk a cup of coffee there, I trav- 
eled by train via Dresden to Pirna without leaving the carriage. 
The human forms I saw during the journey and on the plat- 
form in Dresden I took to be “fleeting-improvised-men” pro- 
duced by miracle; I did not pay any particular attention to 
them, because even then I was tired of all miracles. I was 
strengthened in my attitude by what the voices said; Flechsig’s 


5 
11S 
Ll 


MEMOIRS 


soul used an expression it had invented of “fossilized.””** Dres- 
den, through which we were supposed to have traveled. From 
Pirna Station I traveled in a cab on a rather bumpy road up to 
this Asylum. More than a year elapsed before I realized that I 
had been brought to Pirna and to Sonnenstein, when, on one of 
the very few occasions I had access to the “Museum” (com- 
mon-room) of the Asylum, I saw pictures of earlier Kings of 
Saxony on the walls. When I first arrived the voices called the 
place “The Devil's Castle.” I still occupy the same rooms! was 
given then—number 28 on the first floor of the Elbe wing, with 
an adjoining bedroom. A few times I temporarily had a different 
living-room because of some alterations and decorations; the 
bedroom destined for me, however—as I will mention again 
later—I did not use for about two years but slept in padded 
cells, particularly number 97 of the round wing on the ground 
floor. In contrast to the fairly elegantly furnished Asylum of 
Dr. Pierson, the rooms struck me as rather poor at first. I also 
wish to mention that for about a year I did not have the view 
from my windows which now offers itself freely to me over the 
whole Elbe Valley. There were some dense chestnut trees, 
since felled, which at the time obstructed the view almost 
completely, so that even by looking out of the windows I could 
not learn anything of what went on in the outside world. 

I can divide the time of my stay at Sonnenstein into two 
periods, of which the first on the whole still retained that seri- 
ous, holy and sometimes awesome quality which characterized 
my life in the latter part of my stay in Flechsig’s Asylum and 


58. “Amongst the fossils,” [English in the original] was Flechsig’s soul’s favorite 
expression for “among the fleeting-improvised-men,” following its tendency 
when referring to supernatural matters, to replace the basic language by some 
modern-sounding and therefore almost ridiculous terms. Thus it also liked to 
speak of a “principle of light-telegraphy,” to indicate the mutual attraction of rays 


and nerves. 





Transfer to Sonnenstein.,, 


in Dr. Pierson’s Asylum; in contra-distinction the second period 
merged gradually more and more into ordinary (not to say vul- 
gar) channels. The first period lasted about a year; the second 
period continues, modified of late only by becoming less vul- 
gar in some respects. In the first period the miracles were still 
terrifying and threatening in their bodily and mental effects, so 
that for a long time I was most seriously concerned for my life, 
my manliness and later my reason; in the second period—nat- 
urally very gradually and not without some set backs—the 
miracles became increasingly harmless, not to say senseless 
and childish, although to some extent still repugnant. 

In the first period I was still convinced that I was dealing 
not with real human beings but ”fleeting-improvised-men.”” 
I still cannot see that this was an error on my part; from what 
I experienced at the time and still experience daily I must 
rather leave open the possibility that I was right; in other 
words the so-called “play-with-human-beings” has only gradu- 
ally changed to that state in which, now regarded from out- 
side, it would appear that mankind had not changed. In order 
to make this idea, which is hard to understand and not even 
completely clear to me, somewhat comprehensible, I must 
first give an account of the conditions of my external environ- 
ment during the first years of my stay in this Asylum. Of the 
doctors of the Asylum, I got to know the Superintendent of the 
Asylum, Dr. Weber, and his assistant Dr. R., at first only in 
person and not by name, on the very first day during a physical 
examination in the bathroom (on the ground floor) when a 
stethoscope was used; I only learnt their names by chance at 
the end of a year or more. I have since received daily visits 
from these gentlemen; apart from them I only occasionally 
saw the senior attendant R. and a few attendants (M., Th,} 





59. Forthis reason I kept almost total silence. 


opera 
117 


MEMOIRS 


and Sch. who has since left. M. was the attendant particularly 
charged with my care. 

Other patients did not seem to exist in the Asylum at the 
time; at least on the corridor which I inhabited where there 
were nine rooms I did not notice any; only after some time 
had elapsed did I notice one patient addressed as Prince 
earners sky and a second as Mr. B., the latter particularly 
through his playing the violin. Even during my daily walks in 
the garden of the Asylum with two or three attendants (the 
above-mentioned) I was always alone during the first months; 
at that time there was nothing to be seen of the large number 
of other patients of whom I now see up to 80 and 100 with me 
in the garden. The voices called the attendants “rascals” (com- 
pare footnote 56); I must assume that they had the properties 
of “fleeting-improvised-men” (and therefore were really souls}, 
because they kept up nerve-contact with me in which I fre- 
quently heard from them expressions belonging to the basic 
language; I heard phrases, particularly from the attendant Sch., 
which in the basic language serve to express astonishment— 
“Good Heavens” and “Hail and Thunder”—({not aloud but in 
the nerve-language) while he personally was in another room. 
At times M. and Sch. unloaded into my body a part of their 
bodies in the form of a foul mass in order “to remove them- 
selves’; M. repeatedly placed himself into my arm as a so- 
called “large nerve” (a jelly-like mass about the size of a 
cherry) through which in a certain sense he participated in my 
thinking and my sensations like the other rays or nerves. The 
“rascals,” in their capacity as souls, were said to have the gift 
of miracles; at certain special events there was talk of rascals’ 
miracles,” through which these were said to have come about. 

My wife visited me at Sonnenstein at longish intervals— 
probably of a few months. I was petrified when I saw her the 
first time entering my room on such a visit; I had long believed 
she was no more among the living. This belief was based on 





Transfer to Sonnenstein... 


very definite evidence—as also in the case of other human be- 
ings—so that my wife’s reappearance remains an unsolved rid- 
dle to this day. I repeatedly had the nerves belonging to my 
wife’s soul in my body or felt them approaching my body from 
outside—here again the certainty of my memory leaves no 
room for doubt about the objective reality of the event. These 
soul parts were filled with the devoted love which my wife 
has always shown me; they were the only souls who showed 
willingness to renounce their own further existence and find 
their end in my body, expressing it in the basic language as 
“let me.” 

When my wife visited me in person at Sonnenstein I believed 
for a long time that she was only “fleetingly-improvised” for 
the occasion; and that she would therefore dissolve, perhaps 
even on the stairs or directly after leaving the Asylum. It was 
said that her nerves would be “encapsulated” again after every 
visit. On one of her visits—probably on my birthday in 1894— 
my wife brought me a poem, which I reproduce here word for 
word because it made such a deep impression on me at the 
time. It went as follows: 


Ere true peace can embrace you— 
God’s still and silent peace— 
The peace life never giveth 

Nor worldy joys beneath, 

It needs God’s arm must strike 

A blow and wound you deep, 

So that you cry: Have mercy, 
God, have mercy on my days; 





60. This expression could be rendered, grammatically complete, in the following 
words: “Let me—you rays that are trying to pull me back—do let me follow the 
power of attraction of my husband’s nerves: I am prepared to dissolve in my hus- 
band’s body.” 


MEMOIRS 


It needs a cry must ring, 

Ring from your soul 

And darkness be within you 

As ‘fore the world’s first day. 

It needs that crushing pain 

Must wholly vanquish you, 

And not a lonely tear be left 

In your poor wretched soul. 

And when you've done with weeping 
And weary art, so weary, 

Then comes to you a faithful guest 
God's still and silent peace. 


This poem, by an unknown author, made such a singular 
impression on me because the phrase “God’s peace” which re- 
curs in it, is the expression used in the basic language for sleep 
produced by rays which I heard innumerable times before and 
since. At the time I could hardly believe that this was mere co- 
incidence. 

During the first weeks of my stay at Sonnenstein (in early 
July 1894), certain changes occurred both in my longstanding 
nerve communication with rays, and closely related with it in 
the heavenly conditions; these seem to have been of funda- 
mental importance for the whole period of time which has 
since passed. Again it is extremely difficult to describe these 
changes in words because matters are dealt with which lack all 
analogies in human experience and which I appreciated di- 
rectly only in part with my mind’s eye,*'in part only by their 





61. I use here the expression “seeing with the mind’s eye,” which I used before 
(Chapter 8, p. 109), because I cannot find a more suitable one in our human lan- 
guage. We are used to thinking all impressions we receive from the outer world are 
mediated through the five senses, particularly that all light and sound sensations 
are mediated through eye and ear. This may be correct in normal circumstances. 





Transfer to Sonnenstein... 


effects, so that I may have formed but an approximate picture. 
In the previous chapter it was related that the number of 
“tested” souls and soul parts present in the sky had increased 
markedly through soul-division. Among these souls Flechsig’s, 
which had for a time retained a fair proportion of its human in- 
telligence in virtue of the size of its two main forms (as “supe- 
rior Flechsig” and as “middle Flechsig”), was still prominent; 
in the course of years, however, it progressively lost its intelli- 
gence so that now hardly a trace of awareness of its own iden- 
tity remains. For my part I was always led by the desire to 
draw these souls and soul parts to myself and so ultimately 
to cause their dissolution; I started from the perfectly sound 
supposition that when all “tested” or impure souls had been 
eliminated from their position of so-called middle instances 
between myself and God’s omnipotence, a solution of the 
conflict in consonance with the Order of the World would fol- 
low automatically; either a cure by a complete calming of 
my nerves through sleep, or—a possibility I later considered— 
unmanning, in consonance with the Order of the World, with 
the purpose of creating new human beings. These “tested” 
souls, however, were possessed only by the opposite endeavor, 
namely to assert themselves in their usurped heavenly posi- 
tion which gave them the gift of miracles; whenever they came 
closer they tried to withdraw again by pushing other souls or 
soul parts in turn into the foreground. 

One night—perhaps the fourth or fifth after my arrival at 


However, in the case of a human being who like myself has entered into contact 
with rays and whose head is in consequence so to speak illuminated by rays, this 
is not all. I receive light and sound sensations which are projected direct on to my 
inner nervous system by the rays; for their reception the external organs of seeing 
and hearing are not necessary. I see such events even with eyes closed and where 
sound is concerned would hear them as in the case of the “voices,” even if it were 
possible to seal my ears hermetically against all other sounds. 


MEMOIRS 


Sonnenstein—I succeeded with immense mental effort in tem- 
porarily drawing down to myself all impure (“tested”) souls; it 
would only have required a thorough “covering with rays” for 
my recovery through one nerve-restoring sleep and with it the 
disappearance of the impure souls. (Unfortunately one could 
not decide to adopt this course for the reason mentioned previ- 
ously.) In consequence Flechsig’s soul took special measures to 
exclude the recurrence of such a danger to its existence and to 
that of other impure souls. It resorted to mechanical fastening 
as an expedient; a technique of which I was only able to get a 
rough idea. This mechanical fastening first occurred in a looser 
form called “tying-to-rays,” where the word “rays” seems to 
have been used in a special sense which I did not fully under- 
stand. I can only describe the picture I saw with my mind's 
eye. According to this the souls hung on a kind of bundle of 
rods (like the fasces of the Roman Lictors}, but in such a man- 
ner that the rods spread out below like a cone, while the 
nerves of the souls were tied fast around the upper points. 
When this looser form of fastening seemed not to afford suffi- 
cient defense against my power of attraction and the danger of 
dissolving in my body, a more resistant form was chosen 
which was called “tying-to-celestial-bodies.” As the expres- 
sion denotes, a tying to some distant stars occurred which 
from then on excluded the possibility of a complete dissolu- 
tion in my body in consequence of my power of attraction; on 
the contrary withdrawal was safeguarded through the mechan- 
ical fastening so established. When the “middle Flechsig” used 
this form of fastening for the first time, it was felt in God's 
realms that behavior so contrary to the Order of the World 
could not be tolerated. The “middle Flechsig” was therefore 
forced to untie himself again. But when the experiment was 
later repeated there was no longer sufficient energy for such 
measures; the tying was permitted, in which not only all other 
Flechsig soul parts participated, but also the souls in their 


(rae 
122 
oe) 





Transfer to Sonnenstein.., 


train, particularly that of v. W. and finally God’s omnipotence 
itself. In this way “tying-to-celestial-bodies” became a perma- 
nent institution continuing to the present day and led to fur- 
ther consequences, particularly the “writing-down-system,” 
now to be described. I realize that such a conception, according 
to which one must think of my body on our earth as connected 
to other stars by stretched out nerves, is almost incomprehen- 
sible to other people considering the immense distances in- 
volved; for me however as a result of my daily experiences over 
the last six years there can be no doubt as to the objective real- 
ity of this relation. 

The mentioned writing-down-system is extraordinarily dif- 
ficult to explain to other people even vaguely. That it exists is 
overwhelmingly proved to me day after day; yet it belongs 
even for me to the realm of the unfathomable because the ob- 
jective it pursues must be recognized by all who know human 
nature as something in itself unattainable. It is obviously a 
stop-gap measure and it is difficult to decide whether it arises 
from a wrong (that is contrary to the Order of the World) intent 
or from faulty reasoning. 

Books or other notes are kept in which for years have been 
written-down all my thoughts, all my phrases, all my neces- 
saries, all the articles in my possession or around me, all 
persons with whom I come into contact, etc. I cannot say 
with certainty who does the writing down. As I cannot imag- 
ine God’s omnipotence lacks all intelligence, I presume that 
the writing-down is done by creatures given human shape 
on distant celestial bodies after the manner of the fleeting- 
improvised-men, but lacking all intelligence; their hands are 
led automatically, as it were, by passing rays for the purpose of 
making them write-down, so that later rays can again look at 
what has been written. 

To illuminate the purpose of this whole system I must en- 
large further. All the attacks made over the years, on my life, 


MEMOIRS 


my bodily integrity, my manliness and my reason, were and 
still are based on the same idea: to withdraw again as far as 
possible from the power of attraction of my over-excited 
nerves, which far surpasses anything that has ever existed be- 
fore. To that end one at first considered my unmanning, appar- 
ently in recognition of the fundamental tendency of the Order 
of the World (see Chapter 5]. This was not unmanning aimed 
at renewing mankind in consonance with World Order, but 
only an intended insult, for in a peculiar way it was imagined, 
or perhaps wishfully thought, that an unmanned body would 
lose its power of attraction for the rays. Years after my arrival 
at Sonnenstein, the idea of unmanning still appeared, if I may 
so express myself, in the minds of the souls. Small parts of 
Flechsig’s soul which were distant, and therefore not in con- 
tact with my nerves for quite some time, used repeatedly to 
exclaim as if astonished: “Is he not unmanned yet?” God's rays 
frequently mocked me about a supposedly imminent unman- 
ning as “Miss Schreber” [in English in the original]; an expres- 
sion used frequently and repeated ad nauseam was: “You are 
to be represented as given to voluptuous excesses,”® etc. I my- 
self felt the danger of unmanning for a long time as a threaten- 
ing ignominy, especially while there was the possibility of my 
body being sexually abused by other people. 

For over a year therefore the female nerves, or nerves of 
voluptuousness, which had penetrated my body in great masses, 





62. The notion of “representing,” that is to say of giving to a thing or a persona 
semblance different from its real nature (expressed in human terms “of falsify- 
ing”) played and still plays a great role generally in the ideas of souls. In this vein 
it was said innumerable times on later occasions: You are to be represented as a 
scoffer of God, or as somebody who has committed soul murder (compare above 
Chapter 2, p. 34}, etc. I think this relates to God’s having as a rule only an outward 
impression of the living human being and to rays, which had come in nerve- 
contact with a human being, having at every “sight” (twinkle of an eye) only a 
single (momentary) impression. Only in this way can I comprehend the total 





Transfer to Sonnenstein... 


could not gain any influence on my behavior or on my way of 
thinking. I suppressed every feminine impulse by exerting my 
sense of manly honor and also by the holiness of my religious 
ideas, which occupied me almost exclusively; indeed I really 
became aware of the presence of female nerves only when they 
were artificially set in vibration by rays on certain occasions so 
as to produce a sensation of timidity and to “respresent” me 
as a human being trembling with feminine anxiety. On the 
other hand my will power could not prevent the occurrence, 
particularly when lying in bed, of a sensation of voluptuous- 
ness which as so-called “soul-voluptuousness” exerted an in- 
creased power of attraction on the rays; this expression used by 
the souls meant a voluptuousness sufficient for souls but felt 
by human beings only as general bodily well-being without real 
sexual excitement. (Compare Chapter 7 towards the end.) 
With this phenomenon becoming increasingly manifest in 
the course of time, God might have become aware that un- 
manning was not a way of “forsaking” me, that is of freeing 
Himself again from the power of attraction of my nerves. From 
this the idea arose to “retain me on the masculine side,” but— 
again under basically false pretenses—not in order to restore 
my health, but to destroy my reason or to make me demented. 
Again one paid no attention to the fact that the nerves, even of 
a demented human being, would in a state of highly pathologi- 
cal excitement retain their power of attraction—provided, of 


inability tounderstand living man as an organism, of which I will later bring more 
striking proof. One may therefore have tried to persuade oneself—in the calamity 
in which God’s omnipotence found itself through the existence of Flechsig’s 
“tested” soul—that if one obtained an impression of a human being different from 
his real nature, it would then also be possible to treat him according to this im- 
pression. The whole thing amounts therefore to a self-deception quite useless in 
practice; for a human being naturally has always in his actual behavior, and partic- 
ularly in the (human) language, the means of establishing his true nature against 
intended “representing.” 


5 
125 


MEMOIRS 


course, that they were still generally capable of sensation as of 
pain, voluptuousness, hunger, cold, etc. Incessantly therefore, 
day after day and hour after hour, poison of corpses and other 
putrid matter which the rays carried was heaped upon my 
body, in the belief that it would be possible in this way to suf- 
focate me eventually and in particular to rob me of my reason. 
In the next chapter I will relate what temporary damage was 
thus wrought on my body in a most threatening manner. 

I have reason to assume that the poison of corpses or the 
putrid matter was taken from the same celestial bodies to 
which the rays had been tied, and where they were packed as it 
were with it or soaked it up in passing. Some of the rays had 
been given the shape of miracled birds about which I shall 
have more to say later. It became apparent that the tested souls 
which were still in heaven, and what had remained of the erst- 
while forecourts of heaven, which one had kept in reserve in 
order to be able to take refuge behind them, had in the course 
of time totally lost their intelligence, that is to say they had no 
thoughts of their own left. On the other hand it seems to lie in 
the nature of rays that they must speak as soon as they are in 
motion; the relevant law was expressed in the phrase “do not 
forget that rays must speak,” and this was spoken into my 
nerves innumerable times, particularly early on. But in fact for 
years, lacking their own thoughts, they have spoken of nothing 
but their own miracles, falsely attributing fear of them to my 
nerves (for instance, “If only my fingers were not paralyzed,” 
or “If only miracles would not affect my knee-cap”}; further, 
everything I was about to do was cursed (for instance, “If only 
the cursed piano-playing would cease,” as soon as I sit down at 
the piano, or even “If only the cursed cleaning of nails would 
cease,” as soon as I start cleaning my nails}. Over and above this 
one has the boundless impudence—I can use no other expres- 
sion—to demand that I should express this falsified nonsense 
in spoken words as if it were my own thoughts, in this fashion: 





Transfer to Sonnenstein... 


“Tf only the cursed piano-playing would cease” was followed by 
the question: “Why don’t you say it (aloud)?,” and this again was 
followed by the falsified answer: “Because I am stupid, perhaps,” 
or again “Because I am frightened of Mr. M.” (compare footnote 
26, Chapter 5). Naturally there are now also pauses in which 
there is nothing to report of miracles directed against my person, 
nor any definite “thought of resolution” to undertake this or 
that occupation which the rays, being able to read my thoughts, 
can recognize; in other words, when I indulge in thinking 
nothing, particularly at night when I sleep or in day-time when 
Itemporarily rest or walk about in the garden without thinking, 
etc. The writing-down-material, mainly my previous thoughts 
besides a few constantly recurring additions of more or less 
senseless and partly offensive phrases, vulgar terms of abuse, 
etc., serves to fill in these pauses (that is to say to give the rays 
something to talk about even during these pauses}. I will per- 
haps append an anthology of these phrases to the present essay 
in order to give the reader at least some inkling of the non- 
sense my nerves have for years had to put up with. 

The offensive phrases and abusive words serve the particular 
purpose of inciting me to talk aloud and so to make sleep im- 
possible at the proper times; for the whole policy of souls cul- 
minates in the prevention of sleep and soul-voluptuousness; 
but the aim of the whole policy remains totally obscure. The 
writing-down also serves as another peculiar trick which again 
is based on a total misunderstanding of human thinking. It 
was believed that my store of thoughts could be exhausted by 
being written-down, so that eventually the time would come 
when new ideas could no longer appear in me; this of course is 
quite absurd, because human thinking is inexhaustible; for 
instance reading a book or a newspaper always stimulates 
new thoughts. This was the trick: as soon as an idea I had 
had before and which was (already) written-down, recurred— 
such a recurrence is of course quite unavoidable in the case of 


eel: 
127 
eae 


MEMOIRS 


many thoughts, for instance the thought in the morning “Now 
I will wash” or when playing the piano the thought “This is a 
beautiful passage,” etc——as soon as such a budding thought 
was spotted in me, the approaching rays were sent down with 
the phrase “We have already got this,” scilicet written-down; 
in a manner hard to describe the rays were thereby made unre- 
ceptive to the power of attraction of such a thought. 

I must deny myself expounding the writing-down-system 
and its consequences further; it would in any case be im- 
possible to make this fully clear to anyone who has not had 
the same experience on his own nerves. I can only give the 
assurance that the writing-down-system and _ particularly 
the intrusion of “We have already got this’ when any of my 
earlier thoughts recurred, became a mental torture, from 
which I suffered severely for years and to which I am only 
slowly getting a little accustomed; because of it, I had to 
endure trials of patience as they have probably never before 
had to be borne by a human being,“ made all the worse by 


63. There had been times when I could not help myself but speak aloud or make 
some noise, in order to drown the senseless and shameless twaddle of the voices, 
and so procure temporary rest for my nerves. This might have appeared as raving 
madness to the physicians who did not know the true reason, and so might have 
caused the corresponding treatment which indeed was meted out to me for years, 
in any case at night-time. That the expression “mental torture” is no exaggeration 
can be gauged from the fact that during the time I slept in the cell (1896.-1898), I 
spent several hours of almost every night outside the bed, pounding with my fists 
against the closed shutters or, when the shutters had been removed, standing next 
to the open window clad only in a shirt at a temperature in winter of minus 8 to 
minus 10 degrees R., shivering with cold (the more so as the natural frost was in- 
creased by miracled frost}, or groping in the totally darkened cell and by miracles 
being made to hit my head against the low ceiling; yet all this I found more bear- 
able than to remain in bed, which I simply could not endure when sleep could not 
be procured. 

I must be prepared for the question, why did I not inform my physicians of 
all these things early on by lodging a complaint? I can only answer by asking a 


Tail 
128 
a) 





Transfer to Sonnenstein... 


the difficulties of my outward circumstances (restriction of 
freedom, etc.). 

I have only to add that in the above description I have antic- 
ipated somewhat in time for the sake of coherence; in actual 
fact the development described belongs in part to a much later 
period, for instance there was no question of playing the piano, 
which I mentioned above, for almost a year after my arrival at 
Sonnenstein. 


ee 


question in turn: would one have given my description of these supernatural 
events the slightest credence? Even now I would count it a great triumph for my 
dialectical dexterity if through the present essay, which seems to be growing to 
the size of a scientific work, I should achieve only the one result, to make the 
physicians shake their heads in doubt as to whether after all there was some truth 
in my so-called delusions and hallucinations. Had I merely attempted a verbal dis- 
cussion, I could hardly have counted on sufficient patience to listen to a longish 
disquisition from me; still less would one have found it worth while to think 
about the supposed nonsense. Added to this I thought during my early stay in this 
Asylum that the physicians themselves were only fleeting-improvised-men and 
that their deliberations were influenced by the rays hostile to me—a notion, the 
latter part of which in any case, I must still maintain as correct, however little the 
physicians, in the nature of the matter, will realize it themselves. Besides, the hos- 
tile disposition of the rays {that is of God) ceases as soon as they are reassured that 
they can spend themselves in my body with soul-voluptuousness, or if I am in a 
position to give immediate proof of the indestructibility of my reason, which 
amounts to showing them that the policy which aims at its destruction is doomed 


to failure. More about this later. 


Personal experiences at 
Sonnenstein. “Interferences” 
accompanying contact with 
the rays. “Creation of a 


false feeling” 


10 


DURING THE FIRST weeks of my stay at Sonnenstein (in 
July or August 1894), I am convinced certain important changes 
took place with the sun. As before when discussing super- 
natural matters, I have to confine myself to relating impres- 
sions which I received and can only conjecture in how far these 
changes were objective events. I recollect that for a longish pe- 
riod there appeared to be a smaller sun. This sun, as men- 
tioned at the end of Chapter 8, was first led by Flechsig’s soul 
but later by a soul whose nerves I identified as those of the 
Director of the present Ayslum, Dr. Weber. While writing 
these lines I am fully aware that other people can only think 
this is sheer nonsense, as Dr. Weber is still among the living, a 
fact I myself have occasion to verify daily. Yet the impressions 
I received seem to me so certain that I must assume that some 
time in the past Dr. Weber departed from this life and as- 
cended with his nerves to Blessedness, but then returned to 
life among mankind; this notion may be unfathomable for hu- 
man beings and a possibility only to be explained in a super- 





Personal experiences at Sonnenstein... 


natural manner.®* After the power of its rays had been exhausted 
this smaller sun was then probably replaced by another sun. 
For several days and nights I had at that time the most wonder- 
ful and magnificent impressions as already mentioned in foot- 
note 11, Chapter 1; in my opinion this was the time when the 
anterior realms of God had been exhausted and the posterior 
realms of God appeared on the scene for the first time. 

I believe I may say that at that time and at that time only, 
I saw God’s omnipotence in its complete purity. During the 
night—and as far as I can remember in one single night—the 
lower God (Ariman) appeared. The radiant picture of his rays 
became visible to my inner eye (compare footnote 61), while I 
was lying in bed not sleeping but awake—that is to say he was 
reflected on my inner nervous system. Simultaneously I heard 
his voice; but it was not a soft whisper—as the talk of the 
voices always was before and after that time—it resounded in 
a mighty bass as if directly in front of my bedroom windows. 
The impression was intense, so that anybody not hardened 
to terrifying miraculous impressions as I was, would have been 
shaken to the core. Also what was spoken did not sound 
friendly by any means: everything seemed calculated to instill 
fright and terror into me and the word “wretch” was frequently 
heard—an expression quite common in the basic language to 
denote a human being destined to be destroyed by God and to 
feel God’s power and wrath. Yet everything that was spoken 
was genuine, not phrases learnt by rote as they later were, but 
the immediate expression of true feeling. 

For this reason my impression was not one of alarm and fear, 
but largely one of admiration for the magnificent and the sub- 
lime; the effect on my nerves was therefore beneficial despite 
the insults contained in some of the words; when the “tested” 


63A. With regard to this andsome other points, compare the reservations in the 
Preface. 


MEMOIRS 


souls which had for a time kept shyly in the background dared 
to appear again, I could not but express my feelings repeatedly 
in words such as “Oh how pure!”—towards the majesty of the 
divine rays—and “Oh how vulgar!“—towards the tested souls. 
Further, the divine rays read my thoughts correctly, without 
falsifying them, as has been done without exception since; 
they even gave them verbal expression in a rhythm correspon- 
ding to the natural movement of human nerves,® so that de- 
spite all the frightening side effects, the total impression I 
received was a calming one and eventually I fell asleep. 

On the following day and perhaps on one or two more days 
(in fact in day-time while I was in the garden) I saw the upper 
God (Ormuzd}, this time not with my mind’s eye but with my 
bodily eye. It was the sun, although not the sun in her usual 
appearance as known to every human being, but surrounded by 
a silver sea of rays which covered a Gth or 8th part of the sky, 
as mentioned in footnote 19, Chapter 2. Figures of course do 
not matter very much; but to guard against any danger of exag- 
geration I concede that from my recollection it might as well 
have been only a 10th or the 12th part of the sky. However that 
may be, the sight was of such overwhelming splendor and 
magnificence that I did not dare look at it continually, but 
tried to avert my gaze from the phenomenon. One of the many 
things incomprehensible to me is that other human beings 
should have existed at that time apart from myself, and that 





64. The vibrations of human nerves follow a certain regular cadence, which I feel 
is best described by the expression “rhythm” used above. But I cannot decide 
whether this is the same phenomenon which Kraepelin calls “the ticking of the 
carotid pulse” at the end of Chapter VI of his work mentioned before (6th Edition}, 
volume 1, page 117, as I am not acquainted with the meaning of that expression. 
Words of four or perhaps six syllables accord most easily with this cadence. For 
this reason the phrases Jearnt by rote used in the writing-down-material, which 
aimed at withdrawing from my nerves, chose and still choose preferably words in 
discord with this natural cadence, as for instance my own title “Senatsprdsident.” 





Personal experiences at Sonnenstein.,. 


the attendant M., who alone accompanied me at the time, re- 
mained apparently totally indifferent to this phenomenon. But 
his indifference did not really astonish me, because I consid- 
ered him a fleeting-improvised-man, who of course led a dream 
life and so could not be expected to have any understanding for 
those impressions which must inspire a thinking human being 
with the highest interest. But I am absolutely at a loss to make 
sense of the fact that such a phenomenal impression should 
have passed him by [if he was a real human being} and the 
many thousands of other people in other places who must have 
had the same impression at the time. Of course other people 
will be ready to counter with the slogan that I suffered from a 
mere “hallucination.” But the certainty of my recollection 
makes this for me subjectively quite out of the question, the 
more so as the phenomenon was repeated on several consecu- 
tive days and lasted for several hours on each single day; nor do 
I believe that my memory fails me when I add that that more 
radiant sun spoke to me in the same way as the sun did before 
and still does without interruption. 

After a few days the miraculous phenomena of which I have 
spoken were over; the sun assumed the shape which she 
has since then retained without interruption;®* the talk of the 
voices also turned again into a low whisper. I believe the rea- 
son for this change lies in the fact that at that time even God’s 
omnipotence was induced to follow the example of Flechsig’s 
soul and attempted “tying-to-celestial-bodies.” If the influx of 
God’s pure rays had lasted unhindered, as in the days described 
above and the nights following, I am certain that in a short 


65. By the way, even today the sun looks different to me than before my illness. 
Her rays pale before me if, turned towards her, I speak with a loud voice. I can 
look into the sun unperturbed and am dazzled only very little, whereas in days of 
health, I, like other people, would have found it impossible to look into the sun 


for minutes on end. 


MEMOIRS 


time my recovery would have had to follow, or perhaps even 
that I would have been unmanned and simultaneously impreg- 
nated. But as one wanted neither the one nor the other, but al- 
ways started from the mistaken notion that it would soon be 
possible to free oneself from the power of attraction of my 
nerves by “forsaking” me, tying-to-celestial-bodies was started 
to prevent pure rays reaching my body. How little this policy 
was permanently successful will be shown later.® 

My outward life was extremely monotonous during that 





66. In the above description of the appearance of the posterior realms of God in 
their pure form I have followed exactly the ideas I had formed at the time (in July 
or August 1894) from the impressions I received, and which I retained throughout 
the years. Thinking it over again today, it seems that I made a mistake in believ- 
ing that the phenomena during the night were only those of the lower God 
{Ariman) and the phenomena in day-time only those of the higher God {Ormuzd). 
This error is explained by the fact that I did not then recognize the signs of dis- 
tinction which I now know between the rays of Ariman and the voices of Ariman, 
and the rays of Ormuzd and the voices of Ormuzd from years of further uninter- 
rupted contact: the first name I heard was “Ariman” which led me to believe that 
the whole influx of rays during the night described above started from the lower 
God Ariman. But as in the course of the years that have since passed there has 
never been a time without both the lower God and the upper God appearing alter- 
nately at short intervals, I must assume it was so from the very first appearance of 
the posterior realms of God; so that both the lower and the upper God alternately 
produced the phenomena of the night and the following day. 

I want to add that the lower God (Ariman) and the upper God {Ormuzd) must be 
considered as two distinct beings in spite of God’s omnipotence, which in certain 
respects exists as a unity, and that each of them, also in their mutual relationship, 
has his own particular egoism and own instinct of self-preservation and that they 
therefore tend to push one another forward alternately. I have learnt to recognize 
this especially in their respective writing-down-material which I will give in some 
detail later (compare also footnote 37}. Naturally this clash of otherwise harmo- 
nious interests could only come about because the conditions in consonance with 
the Order of the World had been disturbed in their purity by the intrusion of 
strange, impure elements {the “tested souls”}; this allowed the power of attraction 
of a single person’s nerves to become so strong as to be contrary to the Order of the 


World and so constitute a real danger for the realms of God. 





Personal experiences at Sonnenstein. |, | 


time—the first months of my stay at Sonnenstein. Apart from 
daily morning and afternoon walks in the garden, I mainly sat 
motionless the whole day on a chair at my table, did not even 
move towards the window, where by the way nothing was to 
be seen except green trees (compare above); even in the garden 
I preferred to remain seated always in the same spot, and was 
only occasionally urged by the attendants to walk about, really 
against my will. Naturally opportunities for occupation were 
almost completely lacking even had I had the inclination; dur- 
ing that period everything was kept locked in both my rooms 
and the keys removed; I had access only to one single drawer 
containing a few brushes and similar things. I did not possess 
writing material, all my necessaries (articles of clothing, watch, 
purse, knife, scissors, etc.) were taken from me, there were only 
about 4 to 5 books in my room which I might have read had I 
been so inclined. All the same the main reason for my immobil- 
ity was not so much the actual lack of means of occupation but 
that I considered absolute passivity almost a religious duty. 
Although this idea did not originate spontaneously in me 
but was induced by the voices that talked to me, I kept it up 
myself for a time until I realized that it was purposeless. That 
rays could ever expect me to remain totally immobile (“not 
the slightest movement” was an often-repeated slogan), must 
again be connected I am convinced, with God not knowing 
how to treat a living human being, as He was accustomed to 
dealing only with corpses or at best with human beings lying 
asleep (dreaming). Thus arose the almost monstrous demand 
that I should behave continually as if I myself were a corpse, as 
also a number of other more or less absurd ideas, which were 
all contrary to human nature. Every noise created by miracle 
around me—and this recurs continually at short intervals, ei- 
ther by somebody speaking or making himself otherwise con- 
spicuous, by cracking of walls, creaking of floors, etc.—is in a 
peculiar confusion of terms called an “interference” annoying 


MEMOIRS 


to me. One falsely produces in me the phrase “if only the 
cursed interference would stop,” which is reiterated innumer- 
able times every day, by producing vibrations in my nerves 
which correspond to these words; whereas in reality these 
noises are felt as frightening by the rays, since they produce 
the so-called “listening-in-thought.” Further—in conditions in 
consonance with the Order of the World—it would never occur 
to a human being to consider the talk of his fellow men, for in- 
stance, as an unpleasant interference.” 

I believe I can explain how the wholly absurd notion arose 
by recalling the usual phenomena which accompany nerve- 
contact made with a sleeping human being [in his dreams). 
Through such nerve-contact a temporary connection was ef- 
fected between divine rays and the nerves of that person; of 
course it was calculated to last only a short time, perhaps 
for the purpose of imparting information about matters con- 
cerning the beyond (compare Chapter 1}, or to stimulate po- 
etic imagination, etc. To succumb permanently to the power 
of attraction of such nerves would endanger God Himself; 
therefore one had to attempt to get away again when the pur- 
pose was achieved; one only had to produce little noises by 
miracle (the so-called “interferences”) through which the at- 
tention of the sleeping, perhaps just waking, human being 
was diverted, and this short period of diverted attention suf- 
ficed the rays in the case of nerves not as highly excited as 
mine, to give up the nerve-contact and enable them to with- 
draw from the person. No really serious danger could arise for 
God while it was easy for rays to withdraw, as from only mod- 





67. Some unpleasantness however is connected with this since, as mentioned in 
Chapter 7, I feel a certain painful sensation with every word spoken around me (in 
consequence of the respective human nerves being stimulated by miracle} due to 
rays (which are fixed to celestial bodies) attempting to withdraw from me, causing 


a very unpleasant tearing in my head. 





Personal experiences at Sonnenstein.., 


erately excited nerves. These circumstances were then taken as 
pertaining equally to me without making allowance that my 
relation to divine rays had long ago become indissoluble owing 
to the enormously increased power of attraction of my nerves. 

I considered the immobility demanded from me a duty in- 
cumbent on me both in the interests of self-preservation and of 
God, so as to liberate Him from the embarrassment in which 
He found Himself owing to the “tested souls.” I had formed 
the opinion—probably not altogether unfounded—that more 
rays would be lost if I myself moved to and fro (equally when a 
draft went through the room}; as I was then still filled with 
holy awe towards divine rays because of their high purposes, 
and being also uncertain as to whether eternity really existed 
or whether the store of rays might suddenly be exhausted, I 
considered it my task to prevent any squandering of rays as far 
as it was in my power. I had also formed the view, influenced 
by the opinions of the voices continually talking to me in this 
sense, that a drawing down of “tested souls,” so that they 
should spend themselves totally in my body and thus allow 
the restoration of God’s sole power in the sky, would be much 
facilitated if I kept my body immobile. I therefore made the 
almost incredible sacrifice of desisting from every movement 
and of course from every occupation for several weeks and 
months, the conversation of voices excepted; this went so far 
that not even at night didI dare change my position in bed, be- 
cause the spending of tested souls was to be expected mostly 
during sleep. I made this sacrifice, although I had already then 
received some taste of the “half and half” policy which God’s 
omnipotence pursued towards me, but I could not get myself 
to believe that God harbored really evil intent towards me. 

No change in these conditions occurred until the end of 
1894 or early 1895. It coincided with another miraculous 
phenomenon, the “cursed creation-of-a-false-feeling”; this was 
the name given to it by the voices who recognized the tort 


MEMOIRS 


intended by it. The constant endeavor of rays to withdraw 
from me (to “forsake” me) was checked only by the holiness of 
my purpose which was bound to attract all pure souls or rays, 
and by my deep and sincere concern about my relation to God 
and my own situation in life. One started therefore to falsify 
my own frame of mind through miracles, in order to create 
the impression of a frivolous human being given only to the 
pleasures of the moment (to “represent” me as such, compare 
footnote 62). Such an influence by miracles on one’s mood is 
possible as I have learned by experience, but I am unable to say 
more as to how it comes about; in order to give the reader an 
approximate idea I can only use a comparison, and point to the 
use of morphine which has the effect of producing a relatively 
serene, in any case indifferent mood, in a person who is ha- 
rassed by bodily pain or in the throes of a depression. 

At the beginning I resisted the influence of the “creation-of 
a-false-feeling” (the mood-falsifying-miracle); but as time went 
by I found it easier to allow its influence, because I noticed 
that subjectively I really felt less unhappy and because I had to 
admit, that with all holiness of mind and with all my self-sac- 
rificing endeavors to assist God in His fight against the “tested 
souls,” I had not really achieved very much. I became more in- 
different to my own situation, remembered Horace’s "Carpe 
diem,” attempted to brush aside cares for the future, simply to 
live for the day and accept what life still had to offer. For in- 
stance this led me to resume smoking cigars at the turn of 
1894-95, which I had totally given up for years. On the other 
hand the rays did not achieve their purpose with the “creation- 
of-a-false-feeling.” The power of attraction of my over-excited 
nerves remained undiminished in spite of the changed mood, 
the only difference being that I did not feel as unhappy as be- 
fore. Here also as in almost all miracles which are contrary to 
the Order of the World, it seems the poet’s word of the power 
“which always wills the evil and yet creates the good” applies. 


pemeaal 
138 
a 





Personal experiences at Sonnenstein... 


It goes almost without saying that my behavior as described 
above could not be correctly judged by my environment, least 
of all by my physicians and attendants, assuming always that 
they were then real human beings. As I had shown no interest 
in anything nor displayed any intellectual needs, they could 
hardly see in me anything but a stuporose dullard. And yet the 
real situation towered sky-high above this appearance: I lived 
in the belief—and it is still my conviction that this is the 
truth—that I had to solve one of the most intricate problems 
ever set for man and that I had to fight a sacred battle for the 
greatest good of mankind. Unfortunately my deceiving appear- 
ance to the contrary brought with it innumerable indignities 
in the way I was treated; for years I suffered from them se- 
verely, and it seemed that one had altogether forgotten my 
standing and the high official position I had occupied in life. 
The attendant M. repeatedly threw me back into the bath 
when I wanted to leave it after a time, or in the morning when 
it was time to get up and I wanted to, threw me back into bed 
for reasons unknown to me; or in day-time when I was about 
to doze sitting at the table, he wakened me out of my sleep by 
pulling my beard, or he combed my hair with a fine comb 
while I was in the bath—and this at a time when flights of rays 
plowed through my skull (compare the next chapter). At meal- 
times he used to tie anapkinround my neck as if I were a little 
child. Cigars were given me one at a time at certain hours of 
the day; only several years afterwards did I succeed in obtain- 
ing all the cigars for the day in the morning; later still a box of 
a hundred was put at my disposal as reserve. From another at- 
tendant I once had to suffer the indignity of having my ears 
boxed. Sometimes I opposed such indignities with actual re- 
sistance, particularly when one wanted to remove the wash- 
basin for the night from my bedroom, which was locked from 
the outside; or when one tried to move me from my own bed- 
room to sleep in the cells fitted out for raving madmen. Later 


een 
139 
E43 


MEMOIRS 


on I desisted from all opposition because it led to senseless 
scenes of violence; I kept silent and suffered. 

Naturally nothing is further from my mind than to wish to 
denounce the attendant M. or any other attendant to his supe- 
riors by relating the indignities I had to suffer. I condone the 
excesses which M. was guilty of in view of his low education; 
it is also true that in later years he served me satisfactorily on 
the whole, although he continued to give himself airs. But I 
could not avoid mentioning these little traits if I wanted to 
demonstrate the measure of ignominy which I had to endure 
for years and the deep wounding of my sense of honor which at 
all times was fully alive. 

In order to complete the picture of my situation during the 
early part of my stay at Sonnenstein it is necessary to give an 
account of the miracles which were enacted against me, and I 
will do this in the following chapter. 


Caco 
140 
L 





Bodily integrity damaged 
by miracles 


11 


FROM THE FIRST beginnings of my contact with God up 
to the present day my body has continuously been the object of 
divine miracles. If I wanted to describe all these miracles in de- 
tail I could fill a whole book with them alone. I may say that 
hardly a single limb or organ in my body escaped being tem- 
porarily damaged by miracles, nor a single muscle being pulled 
by miracles, either moving or paralyzing it according to the re- 
spective purpose. Even now the miracles which I experience 
hourly are still of a nature as to frighten every other human be- 
ing to death; only by getting used to them through the years 
have I been able to disregard most of what happens as triviali- 
ties. But in the first year of my stay at Sonnenstein the mira- 
cles were of such a threatening nature that I thought I had to 
fear almost incessantly for my life, my health or my reason. 

In itself a state of affairs must be considered contrary to the 
Order of the World in which the rays serve mainly to inflict 
damage on the body of a single human being or to play tricks 
with the objects with which he is occupied—such harmless 
miracles have become particularly frequent latterly. For rays 


MEMOIRS 


have the task of creating not just of destroying or playing 
childish pranks. Hence all miracles directed against me fail in 
the long run in their purpose; what has been destroyed or dam- 
aged by impure rays must always later be built up or mended 
again by pure rays (compare above Chapter 7, footnote 48}. But 
this does not exclude that temporarily most serious damage is 
caused and very painful conditions arise giving the impression 
of extreme danger. 

Most nearly in consonance with the Order of the World were 
those miracles which were somehow connected with a process 
of unmanning to be carried out on my body. To them belonged 
especially the various changes in my sex organ: several times 
(particularly in bed) there were marked indications of an actual 
retraction of the male organ; frequently however, particularly 
when mainly impure rays were involved, of a softening ap- 
proaching almost complete dissolution; further the removal by 
miracles of single hairs from my beard and particularly my 
mustache; finally a change in my whole stature (diminution of 
body size}—probably due to a contraction of the vertebrae and 
possibly of my thigh bones. The last-mentioned miracle which 
emanated from the lower God (Ariman}, was always accompa- 
nied by him with the announcement “I wonder whether to 
make you somewhat smaller”; I myself had the impression 
that my body had become smaller by about 6-8 cms., that is to 
say approximating the size of the female body. 

The miracles enacted against the organs of the thoracic and 
abdominal cavities were very multifarious. I know least about 
those concerning the heart; I only remember that I once had a 
different heart*—still during my stay in the University Clinic 





68. This, as indeed the whole report about the miracles enacted on my body, will 
naturally sound extremely strange to all other human beings, and one may be in- 
clined to see in it only the product of a pathologically vivid imagination. In reply I 
can only give the assurance that hardly any memory from my life is more certain 


aa 
142 
ee pa 





Bodily integrity damaged... 


of Leipzig. On the other hand my Jungs were for a long time 
the object of violent and very threatening attacks. By nature 
my lungs and chest are very healthy; but my lungs were so af- 
fected by miracles that for a time I seriously believed I had to 
fear a fatal outcome in consequence of pulmonary phthisis. 
A “lung worm” was frequently produced in me by miracles; I 
cannot say whether it was an animal-like being or a soul-like 
creature; I can only say that its appearance was connected with 
a biting pain in the lungs similar to the pains I imagine occur 
in inflammation of the lungs. The lobes of my lungs were at 
times almost completely absorbed, I cannot say whetheras the 
result of the activity of the lung worm alone or also because of 
miracles of a different kind; I had the definite feeling that my 
diaphragm was raised high in my chest to almost directly un- 
der my larynx and that there remained only a small remnant of 
lung in between with whichI could hardly breathe. There were 
days when during my walks in the garden I had to reconquer 
my lungs anew with every breath. For the part which is so 
miraculous is that the rays cannot but furnish a suffering body 
with whatever is most essential for its preservation, because to 
create is their essence and nature. 

At about the same time some of my ribs were sometimes 
temporarily smashed, always with the result that what had been 
destroyed was re-formed after a time. One of the most horrify- 
ing miracles was the so-called compression-of-the-chest-miracle, 
which I endured at least several dozen times; it consisted in 
the whole chest wall being compressed, so that the state of op- 
pression caused by the lack of breath was transmitted to my 





than the miracles recounted in this chapter. What can be more definite for a hu- 
man being than what he has lived through and felt on his own body? Small mis- 
takes in naming the organs involved may have occurred as my anatomical 
knowledge is naturally only that of a layman; but generally I think I have achieved 
accuracy even in that. 


r 
143 
tae 


MEMOIRS 


whole body. The compression-of-the-chest-miracle recurred 
several times in later years; but like the other miracles de- 
scribed here, it belongs mainly to the second half of the year 
1894 and perhaps the first half of the year 1895. 

Concerning the stornach: already during my stay in Flech- 
sig’s Asylum the Viennese nerve specialist named in Chapter 5 
miraculously produced in place of my healthy natural stomach 
a very inferior so-called “Jew’s stomach.” Later for a time the 
miracles were in preference directed against my stomach, partly 
because the souls begrudged me the sensual pleasure con- 
nected with the taking of food, partly because they considered 
themselves superior to human beings who require earthly 
nourishments, they therefore tended to look down on all eat- 
ing and drinking with some disdain.® I existed frequently 
without a stomach; I expressly told the attendant M., as he 
may remember, that I could not eat because I had no stomach. 
Sometimes immediately before meals a stomach was so to speak 
produced ad hoc by miracles. This was done particularly by 
von W.'s soul, which in at least some of its forms sometimes 
showed a friendly spirit towards me. Naturally this never 
lasted long; the stomach which had been produced by miracles, 
in any case only an inferior stomach, was usually removed 
again miraculously by v. W.’s soul during the meal “because of 
a change of mind”; great changeability is a marked feature of 
the soul-character, absolutely divine rays perhaps excluded. 
Food and drink taken simply poured into the abdominal cavity 
and into the thighs, a process which however unbelievable it 
may sound, was beyond all doubt for me as I distinctly remem- 
ber the sensation. 

In the case of any other human being this would have 


69. It was the same feeling which, for instance, made the Commandatore in Don 
Giovanni when he appears to the latter as a departed spirit, refuse the proffered 
meal with the words: “Know that I abhor all earthly food,” etc. 


feel 
144 
Le es 








Bodily integrity damaged... 


resulted in natural pus formation with an inevitably fatal out- 
come; but the food pulp could not damage my body because 
all impure matter in it was soaked up again by the rays. Later, 
I therefore repeatedly went ahead with eating unperturbed, 
without having a stomach; all in all I gradually got used to re- 
garding everything which happened in my body with complete 
equanimity. Even now I am convinced that I am immune to 
all natural disease influences; disease germs only arise in me 
through rays and are removed again in the same way by rays. 
Indeed I doubt very much whether I am at all mortal as long 
as the communication with rays lasts; for instance, I think I 
could take the strongest poison without particular danger to 
my life and my health.” After all what can poisons do but de- 
stroy some important organs or have a destructive effect on 
the blood? Both have happened to me innumerable times 
through rays without any permanent ill effect.” 

Of other internal organs I will only mention the gullet and 
the intestines,” which were torn or vanished repeatedly, fur- 
ther the pharynx, which I partly ate up several times, finally 
the seminal cord, against which very painful miracles were 
directed, with the particular purpose of suppressing the sen- 
sation of voluptuousness arising in my body. I must further 





70. I need hardly say that this is purely hypothetical speculation, and that I have 
not the least intention of actually carrying out such experiments on my body 
which, if nothing else, would certainly cause me severe pain. 


71. The correctness of my assertion that I have so to speak become invulnerable, 
is evidenced by the fact that while I was well I used to suffer several times every 
winter from a heavy cold which lasted a number of days; during the 6 years of my 
stay here I have hardly ever had a real cold at all. Should a catarrhal inflammation 
of the mucous membrane of the nose—which is the essence of a cold—tend to de- 
velop, rays would immediately shoot to the diseased part of my body in such 
numbers that the cold would be stifled in its very beginnings. 


72. Dangerous obstruction of my gut was also repeatedly produced by miracles, 
which was however mostly resolved again, usually after a short time. 


MEMOIRS 


mention a miracle which affected my whole abdomen, the 
so-called putrefaction of the abdomen. This miracle originated 
regularly from von W.’s soul in one of its most impure shapes— 
in contrast to other parts of von W.’s soul—hence the name 
“abdominal putrefaction of von W.” It threw the putrid matter 
which caused the abdominal putrefaction into my belly with 
such ruthlessness, that more than once! believed I would have 
to rot alive, and the rotten smell escaped from my mouth in a 
most disgusting manner. Von W.’s soul assumed that the ab- 
dominal putrefaction would be removed again by God’s rays; 
this happened through rays of a particular kind adapted to this 
purpose, which pushed their way into my intestines like a 
wedge and absorbed their putrid content. God's rays appeared 
to act from the instinctive knowledge that it would be most 
distasteful for them to have to allow themselves to be at- 
tracted by a rotting body. This notion was expressed repeatedly 
in the slogan, that if I were to be forsaken, I should be forsaken 
with “a pure body”; but naturally this notion too suffered from 
the usual obscurity, as apparently one was not at all clear how 
the nerves of a “forsaken” body would lose their power of at- 
traction. Those miracles always appeared most threatening to 
me which were in one way or another directed against my rea- 
son. These concerned firstly my head; secondly during a cer- 
tain period—of probably several weeks round the autumn of 
1894—also the spinal cord, which next to the head was consid- 
ered as the seat of reason. One therefore attempted to pump 
the spinal cord out, which was done by so-called “little men” 
placed in my feet. Later I will have more to say about these 
“little men,” which have some similarity to the phenomenon 
of the same name which I discussed in Chapter 6; as a rule 
there were two of them, a “little Flechsig” and a “little von 
W.,” whose voices I could also hear in my feet. The effect of 
the pumping out was that the spinal cord left my mouth in 
considerable quantity in the form of little clouds, particularly 


Taped 
146 
Lgeee 





Bodily integrity damaged... 


when I was walking in the garden. One can imagine the appre- 
hension with which such events filled me, as I did not then 
know whether or not any part of my reason would thus in fact 
vanish into the air. The miracles directed against my head and 
the nerves of my head happened in manifold ways. One at- 
tempted to pull the nerves out of my head, for a time even 
(during the nights) to transplant them into the head of M. who 
slept in the next room. These attempts caused (besides the fear 
of an actual loss of my nerves) an unpleasant tension in my head. 
However the pulling out succeeded only moderately, the stay- 
ing power of my nerves proved the greater force and the half- 
pulled-out nerves always returned to my head after a short 
time. Serious devastation was caused in my head by the so- 
called “flights of rays,” a phenomenon difficult to describe, the 
effect of which was that my skull was repeatedly sawn asunder 
in various directions. I frequently had—and still have regularly 
daily—the sensation that my whole skull had temporarily 
thinned; in my opinion this was brought about through the 
bony material of my skull being partly pulverized by the de- 
structive action of the rays; but it is restored again by pure rays 
particularly during sleep. One can form some picture of the 
disagreeable sensations these happenings cause if one consid- 
ers that these are the rays of a whole world—somehow mechan- 
ically fastened at their point of issue—which travel around one 
single head and attempt to tear it asunder and pull it apart in a 
fashion comparable to quartering. 

Further, in the time I am discussing attempts were repeat- 
edly made to cover my nerves with some noxious matter; it ap- 
peared as if the natural capacity of nerves to vibrate were 
thereby really impaired, so that even I myself had at times the 
impression of becoming temporarily stupid. One of the agents 
concerned was called “poison of intoxication”; I cannot say 
what its chemical nature was. From time to time also the liq- 
uids of the food I had taken were by miracle placed on the 


Peel 
147 
ee 


MEMOIRS 


nerves of my head, so that these were covered with a sort of 
paste, and the capacity to think temporarily impaired; I re- 
member distinctly that this happened once with coffee. 

All my muscles were (and still are) the object of miracles for 
the purpose of preventing all movements and every occupation 
I am about to undertake. For instance attempts are made to 
paralyze my fingers when I play the piano or write, and to 
cause some damage to my knee-cap to make marching impos- 
sible when I walk about in the garden or in the corridor. Lately 
the effect has mostly been only to make such occupations dif- 
ficult or cause only moderate pain on walking. 

My eyes and the muscles of the lids which serve to open 
and close them were an almost uninterrupted target for mira- 
cles. The eyes were always of particular importance, because 
rays lose the destructive power with which they are equipped 
after a relatively short time as soon as they see something, and 
then enter my body without causing damage. The object seen 
can be either visual (eye) impressions, which are communi- 
cated to the rays when my eyes are open, or images which I 
can cause at will on my inner nervous system by imagination, 
so that they become visible to the rays. I shall return to these 
events, which in the soul-language are called the “picturing” 
of human beings, in another context. Here I will only mention 
that attempts were made early on and kept up throughout the 
past years, to close my eyes against my will, so as to rob me of 
visual impressions and thus preserve the rays’ destructive 
power. This phenomenon can be observed on me at almost 
every moment; whoever watches carefully will observe that 
my eyelids suddenly droop or close even while I am talking to 
other people; this never occurs in human beings under natural 
conditions. In order to keep my eyes open nevertheless, a great 
effort of will is needed; but as I am not always particularly in- 
terested in keeping my eyes open I allow them to be closed 
temporarily at times. 





Bodily integrity damaged... 


During my first months here the miracles on my eyes were 
performed by “little men,” very similar to those I mentioned 
when describing the miracle directed against my spinal cord. 
These “little men” were one of the most remarkable and even 
to me most mysterious phenomena; but I have no doubt what- 
ever in the objective reality of these happenings, as I saw these 
“little men” innumerable times with my mind’s eye” and heard 
their voices. The remarkable thing about it was that souls or 
their single nerves could in certain conditions and for particu- 
lar purposes assume the form of tiny human shapes (as men- 
tioned earlier only of a few millimeters in size), and as such 
made mischief on all parts of my body, both inside and on 
the surface. Those occupied with the opening and closing 
of the eyes stood above the eyes in the eyebrows and there 
pulled the eyelids up or down as they pleased with fine fil- 
aments like cobwebs. Here too those concerned were usually 
a “little Flechsig” and a “little v. W.” and sometimes in addi- 
tion another “little man,” who had originated from Daniel 
Fiirchtegott Flechsig’s soul which still existed at that time. 
Whenever I showed signs of being unwilling to allow my eye- 
lids to be pulled up and down and actually opposed it, the “lit- 
tle men” became annoyed and expressed this by calling me 
“wretch”; if I wiped them off my eyes with a sponge, it was 
considered by the rays as a sort of crime against God's gift of 
miracles. By the way, wiping them away had only a very 
temporary effect, because the “little men” were each time set 
down afresh. Other “little men” were assembled almost 
continuously on my head in great number. They were called 
"little devils.” They literally walked around on my head, 


73. Of course one can not see with the bodily eye what goes on inside one’s own 
body, nor on certain parts of its surface, for instance on the top of the head or on 
the back, but—as in my case—one can see it with one’s mind’s eye, as the neces- 


sary illumination of the inner nervous system is provided by rays. 


MEMOIRS 


curiously nosing about to see whether any new destruction 
had been caused on my head by miracles. In a way they even 
partook of my meals, helping themselves to a part, though nat- 
urally only a tiny part, of the food I ate; it made them appear 
temporarily somewhat swollen, but also less active and less de- 
structive in their intentions. Some of the “little devils” partici- 
pated in a miracle which was often enacted against my head and 
of which I will now say a little more. This was perhaps the 
most abominable of all miracles—next to the compression-of- 
the-chest-miracle; the expression used for it if ] remember cor- 
rectly was “the head-compressing-machine.” In consequence of 
the many flights of rays, etc., there had appeared in my skull a 
deep cleft or rent roughly along the middle, which probably was 
not visible from outside but was from inside. The “little dev- 
ils” stood on both sides of this cleft and compressed my head 
as though in a vice by turning a kind of screw, causing my head 
temporarily to assume an elongated almost pear-shaped form. 
It had an extremely threatening effect, particularly as it was 
accompanied by severe pain. The screws were loosened tem- 
porarily but only very gradually, so that the compressed state 
usually continued for some time. The “little devils” responsi- 
ble mostly derived from v. W.’s soul. These “little men” and 
“little devils” disappeared after a few months never to appear 
again. The moment of their departure coincided approximately 
with the appearance of the posterior realms of God. It is true 
that miracles are still responsible for opening and closing my 
eyelids in the manner described, but for almost six years now 
it has no longer been done by the “little men” but directly by 
rays which set the muscles concerned in motion. In order to 
prevent my closing or opening my eyes at will the thin layer of 
muscle situated in and above the eyelids and serving their 
movement has several times been removed by miracle. But 
again the effect was only temporary: the muscle tissue so lost 
was always restored again—for reasons often mentioned before. 


ee! 
150 
ed 





Bodily integrity damaged... 


Manifold miracles were also directed against my skeleton, 
apart from those against my ribs and skull mentioned earlier. 
In the foot bones particularly in the region of the heel, caries 
was often caused by miracle, causing me considerable pain; 
luckily, however, the severest pains did not last long. A similar 
miracle was the so-called coccyx miracle. This was an extremely 
painful, caries-like state of the lowest vertebrae. Its purpose 
was to make sitting and even lying down impossible. Alto- 
gether I was not allowed to remain forlong in one and the same 
position or at the same occupation: when I was walking one at- 
tempted to force me to lie down, and when I was lying down 
one wanted to chase me off my bed. Rays did not seem to ap- 
preciate at all that a human being who actually exists must be 
somewhere. Because of the irresistible attraction of my nerves 
I had become an embarrassing human being for the rays (for 
God}, in whatever position or circumstance I might be or what- 
ever occupation I undertook. One did not want to admit that 
what had happened was not my fault, but one always tended to 
reverse the blame by way of “representing.” ”* 

I believe I have given an almost complete description in 
this chapter of those miracles which I was led to consider the 
essential ones, because of their threatening character. In the 
course of this essay I will frequently have to mention many 
other miracles of a less dangerous kind (partly on my body, 
partly on the objects around me); some of them had already ap- 
peared side by side with the miracles described above, some 
only started later. 





74.1 for one am sufficiently just not to speak of moral guilt in the ordinary sense 
on the part of God (compare what has been said at the end of Chapter 5, also at the 
end of the second series of Postscripts}. The concept of guilt or sin is a human con- 
cept, which in its essence cannot be used towards souls whose nature differs from 
the human. After all one cannot expect of souls the human virtues of persever- 
ance, self-sacrifice, etc. 


Content of the voices’ talk. 
“Soul-conception.” 
Soul-language. Continuation 


of personal experiences 


12 


AS MENTIONED IN Chapter 9 the talk of the voices had 
already become mostly an empty babel of ever-recurring mo- 
notonous phrases in tiresome repetition; on top of this they 
were rendered grammatically incomplete by the omission of 
words and even syllables. However, the description of a certain 
number of phrases used is of interest, because of the sidelight 
thrown on the souls’ whole way of thinking, their idea of hu- 
man life and of human thinking. Among these phrases are 
those in which I was called a “Prince of Hell'—roughly since 
the time of my stay in Pierson’s Asylum. It was said innumer- 
able times for instance, that “God’s omnipotence has decided, 
that the Prince of Hell is going to be burned alive,” “The 
Prince of Hell is responsible for the loss of rays,” “We an- 
nounce victory over the beaten Prince of Hell,” but then again 
by some of the voices: “Not Schreber, but Flechsig is the true 
‘Prince of Hell,’” etc. 

Anybody who knew me in my former life and had the op- 
portunity of observing my cool and sober nature, will readily 





Content of the voices’ talk... 


believe that I myself could never have ventured on so fantastic a 
term as that of “Prince of Hell,” still less as it was in such queer 
contrast to the poverty of my outward life situation, to the many 
limitations of freedom to which I was subjected, etc. There was 
certainly nothing in the appearance of my surroundings which 
was remindful of either Hell or of a princely setting. In my 
opinion the expression “Prince of Hell,” which was only erro- 
neously applied to me, was originally based on an abstraction. 

The realms of God may always have known that the Order 
of the World however great and magnificent, was yet not with- 
out its Achilles’ heel, inasmuch as the human nerves’ power of 
attracting God’s nerves constituted some danger for the realms 
of God. These dangers were likely to become more acute when 
somewhere on earth or on any other star nervousness or moral 
depravity gained the upper hand. In order to form a clearer pic- 
ture of these dangers the souls had apparently adopted a kind 
of personification, similar to the way in which nations in their 
infancy try to understand the idea of God better by means of 
graven images of false gods. The phrase “Prince of Hell” was 
probably meant to convey the uncanny power inimical to God 
that could develop from moral decay among mankind or a 
general spread of nervous over-excitement in consequence of 
over-civilization. As my nerves’ power of attraction became 
more and more irresistible, the “Prince of Hell” appeared 
suddenly to have become reality in my person. An enemy was 
therefore seen in me who had to be destroyed by all the might 
of divine power; one refused to recognize that on the contrary 
I was the best friend to pure rays from whom alone I could 
expect my recovery or other satisfactory solution of the conflict. 
One was apparently more inclined to share one’s own power 
with impure (“tested” souls])—God’s real enemies—than to put 
up with the idea of being dependent on a single human being 
whom one would otherwise have looked down upon in the 
proud awareness of distant power. 


MEMOIRS 


Phrases of another group having certain factual significance 
were those in which one talked of the “soul-conception.” Fun- 
damentally this contained significant and valuable ideas. In 
its original meaning soul-conception is I think a somewhat 
idealized version which souls had formed of human life and 
thought. One must remember that souls were the departed 
spirits of erstwhile human beings. As such they had a lively 
interest not only in their own human past but also in the 
fortunes of their still-living relatives and friends and in every- 
thing that happened to mankind, they could gain such knowl- 
edge either through nerve-contact or outward impressions by 
actually seeing (compare Chapter 1). They were able to express 
in more or less distinct words some rules of conduct and atti- 
tude to life. I will quote a few of these sentences as examples. 
“Do not think about certain parts of your body” was a rule of 
conduct apparently expressing the idea that man in his normal 
healthy state has no reason to think of particular parts of his 
body, unless reminded of them by pain. “Not at the first de- 
mand,” was another phrase, indicating that a sensible human 
being would not allow himself to be led into one or other ac- 
tion by a momentary impulse. “A job started must be fin- 
ished” was the formula expressing that man should pursue to 
its ultimate goal what he starts, without being distracted by 
adverse influences, etc. 

In man’s thought processes one distinguished the “thought 
of decision’—man’s exertion of will to do a certain thing— 
“wishful thoughts,” “thoughts of hope” and “thoughts of 
fear.” The “thinking-it-over-thought” denoted something 
perhaps also known to psychologists: it often leads a person 
to turn his will power in the opposite direction or at least 
change it from that which at first he may have felt inclined to 
follow, but which on further consideration automatically 
causes doubts. “The human thought-of-recollection” was used 
to indicate man’s automatic need to imprint on his mind by 


igs al 
154 
(Enea 





Content of the voices’ talk... 


repetition an important thought which had occurred to him. 
How deeply ingrained the “human thought-of-recollection” is 
in the nature of the human processes of thought and feeling, 
can be seen from very characteristic instances when in poems 
rhymes (refrains) recur, or when in musical compositions a cer- 
tain sequence of notes expressing the embodiment of beauty 
occurs not only once but is repeated again and again. A very 
prominent part was played in the “soul-conception” by ideas 
about the relation between the two sexes and their respective 
mode of occupation, their tastes, etc. For instance beds, hand- 
mirrors and rakes were considered feminine, basket-chairs and 
spades masculine; of games, chess as masculine, checkers as 
feminine, etc. 

Souls knew very well that a man lies on his side in bed, a 
woman on her back (as the “succumbing part,” considered 
from the point of view of sexual intercourse). I myself, who in 
earlier life never gave it a thought, have only learned this from 
the souls. From what I read in for instance my father’s MED- 
ICAL INDOOR GYMNASTICS (23rd Edition, p. 102}, physi- 
cians themselves do not seem to be informed about it. Further, 
the souls knew that male voluptuousness is stimulated by the 
sight of female nudes, but on the contrary female voluptuous- 
ness to a very much lesser extent if at all by the sight of male 
nudes, while female nudes stimulate both sexes equally. For 
instance the sight of a nude male body perhaps at a swimming 
exhibition, will leave the female public cold (for this reason 
their admission is rightly not considered immoral to the same 
extent as the presence of men at a female swimming exhibi- 
tion), whereas a ballet will produce some sexual stimulation in 
both sexes. I do not know whether these phenomena are gener- 
ally known and considered correct. My own observations and 
the behavior of my own nerves of voluptuousness leave me in 
no doubt that the soul-conception is correct in this respect. I 
am of course fully aware that the reaction of my own (female) 


MEMOIRS 


nerves of voluptuousness does not in itself constitute proof for 
the very reason that it is exceptional for female nerves to be 
present in a male body as in my case. 

A distinction between masculine and feminine with re- 
spect to articles of clothing (the “armamentarium” as it was 
called in the basic language) is almost self-evident; boots ap- 
peared to the souls an especial symbol characteristic of man- 
liness. To the souls “to take off boots” meant much the same 
as unmanning. 

These short remarks may suffice to give an approximate idea 
of the original meaning of the expression “soul-conception.” 
What I know about it I owe partly to definite information— 
during the early part of my illness—and partly to impressions 
received in my contact with souls. I have thus gained insight 
into the nature of human thought processes and human feel- 
ings for which many a psychologist might envy me. 

The phrases about “soul-conception” received a quite differ- 
ent meaning later. They degenerated into mere flourishes with 
which one tried to satisfy the need for speech, while totally 
lacking in own thoughts (compare Chapter 9). “Do not forget 
that you are bound to the soul-conception” and “Now then, 
that is too much according to the soul-conception,” became 
constantly recurring empty phrases, by the endless repetition 
of which I was tortured for years almost beyond endurance and 
still am. The latter phrase especially was the souls’ almost con- 
stant retort when they could not think of what to say further to 
a new thought of mine, and it also shows by its poor stylistic 
form the degeneracy which had set in. In contrast the genuine 
basic language, that is the expression of the souls’ true feelings 
before the time the mechanically repeated phrases com- 
menced, excelled in form also by its dignity and simplicity. 

Certain other phrases with quite important meanings can 
only be mentioned in the next chapter because of their context. 

My outward living conditions have in some respects at 


— 


Content of the voices’ talk... 


least become more bearable since about the first half of the 
year 1895, as mentioned at the end of Chapter 10. Most impor- 
tant was that I started to occupy myself in different ways. It is 
true I still declined to write to my relatives, in particular to my 
wife, although the attendant M. tried to persuade me. I did not 
then believe in the existence of a real mankind outside the 
Asylum, but thought that all the human shapes I saw, in par- 
ticular my wife when she visited me, were “fleeting and im- 
provised” for only a limited time, so that to write letters as 
was suggested to me would have been a sheer farce in which I 
was not prepared to take part. Since then however there have 
been opportunities to play chess (with other patients or with 
attendants) and to play the piano. Having once or twice played 
the piano in the common-room or library of the Asylum dur- 
ing my wife's visits, a small piano was put into my room in the 
spring of 1895 for my regular use. The feelings aroused in me 
when I resumed this occupation which in days of health I had 
enjoyed, I can best describe with a quotation from Tannhauser: 


"Total forgetting descended between today and yester- 
day. All my memories vanished rapidly and I could only 
remember that I had lost all hope of ever greeting you 
again or ever raising my eyes to you.” 


The only time I played the piano in Flechsig’s Asylum 
was on my wife's urgent persuasion; it was the aria from 
Handel’s Messiah “I know that my Redeemer Liveth” from 
a score which happened to be at hand. My state was such that 
I played in the certain conviction of it being the last time in 
my life that my fingers would touch the keys of a piano. 
Having resumed chess and piano-playing in the Asylum, they 
became my two main occupations during the whole five years 
which have since passed. Playing the piano in particular was 
and still is of immense value to me; I must confess that I find 


ea) 
157 
ee 


MEMOIRS 


it difficult to imagine how I could have borne the compulsive 
thinking and all that goes with it during these five years had I 
not been able to play the piano. During piano-playing the non- 
sensical twaddle of the voices which talk to me is drowned.” 
Next to physical exercises it is one of the most efficient forms 
of the so-called not-thinking-of-anything-thought; but again 
one wanted to deprive me of it by introducing the “musical- 
not-thinking-of-anything-thought” as it was called in the soul- 
language. The rays always at least have a visual impression 
from my hands and from my reading the score, and every at- 
tempt at “representing” me by the “creation-of-a-false-feeling” 
and suchlike is doomed to end in failure because of the real 
feeling one can put into piano-playing. Piano-playing therefore 
was and still is one of the main objects of curses. 

The difficulties which were put in my way defy description. 
My fingers are paralyzed, the direction of my gaze is changed 
in order to prevent my finding the correct keys, my fingers are 
diverted on to wrong keys, the tempo is quickened by making 
the muscles of my fingers move prematurely; all these were 
and still are daily occurrences. Even the piano itself was fre- 
quently the object of miracles and strings were broken (luckily 
much more rarely in recent years). In 1897 alone the bill for 
broken piano strings amounted to no less than 86 marks. 

This is one of the few instances which I believe furnishes 
sufficient proof to convince other people of the reality of the 
miracles which I maintain happen. Superficial judgment might 
lead some to assume that I myself have caused the piano 
strings to snap by senseless banging on the piano; this was for 
instance my wife's repeatedly stated opinion, possibly having 
heard it from the physicians. In reply I maintain—and I am 


74. As one cannot play the piano continually, musical clocks serve the same pur- 
pose, and (for the garden} mouth organs, which I recently (spring 1900) asked my 
relatives to get for me. 


[ee 
158 
| 


Content of the voices’ talk... 


convinced that every expert will support me in this—that it is 
altogether impossible to snap the strings of a piano merely by 
banging on the keys, however violently. The small hammers 
linked with the keys only lightly touch the strings, and could 
never strike them sufficiently hard to break them. Let anyone 
try to hit the keys as hard as he likes, even with a hammer or 
a log of wood; the keyboard may perhaps be broken to pieces 
but he will never be able to break a string. Strings have 
broken much less frequently in recent years—it still happens 
occasionally—because the rays’ (God’s) intent towards me 
has become less unfriendly (more about this later) owing to 
my constantly increasing soul-voluptuousness; the rays were 
also forced by still more unpleasant conditions (even for them) 
in particular by the so-called “bellowing,” to consider piano- 
playing the most congenial pastime for all concerned. 

I must mention another miraculous event in this connec- 
tion, although it really belongs to an earlier time, which is one 
of the most mysterious things even I ever experienced who, af- 
ter all, has seen so much of miraculous things. I remember 
that on a certain day while] still kept immobile (that is in the 
summer or autumn of 1894} the attempt was made on one oc- 
casion to place a whole grand piano (Bliithner) in my room by 
miracle; it seems to have been one of v. W.'s miracles. I am 
fully aware how absurd this sounds and I must therefore ask 
myself whether it could not have been a hallucination. But cer- 
tain circumstances make it extremely difficult for me to think 
so. I remember clearly that it took place in broad daylight 
while I was sitting in a chair or on the sofa; in front of me] dis- 
tinctly saw the polished brown surface of a grand piano in the 
making (hardly a few paces away). Unfortunately I disregarded 
the miracle at the time; I wanted nothing whatever to do with 
any kind of miracle; they all filled me with disgust, particu- 
larly as I had made absolute passivity my duty. Later I some- 
times regretted that I did not encourage the miracle ("pacify 


ner 
159 
(eee) 


MEMOIRS 


it” was the expression in the basic language) to find out whether 
it could really be completed. Almost without exception al! 
miracles were and are doomed to failure or rendered much 
more difficult if I oppose them resolutely with my will. And so 
I must leave undecided what objective background the re- 
ported event had: if it really was a hallucination it must have 
been of a most extraordinary kind in view of the immediate 
proximity of the object supposedly seen. 

Miracles of heat and cold were and still are daily enacted 
against me during walks in the garden and when I am indoors, 
always with the purpose of preventing the natural feeling of 
bodily well-being which is caused by the soul-voluptuousness; 
for instance miracles make my feet cold and my face hot. I 
think the physiological mechanism is that during the cold- 
miracle the blood is forced out of the extremities, so causing 
a subjective feeling of cold, and that conversely during the 
heat-miracle the blood is forced towards my face and head, in 
which of course coolness is the condition corresponding to a 
general sense of well-being. From youth accustomed to endur- 
ing both heat and cold, these miracles troubled me little, ex- 
cept when miracles made my feet cold while lying in bed, as 
happened often. Conversely I myself have often been forced to 
seek heat and cold. This was particularly necessary during the 
first years of my stay here, when soul-voluptuousness had not 
yet reached its present degree, in order to divert the rays to- 
wards the chilly parts particularly to the hands and feet, and so 
protect the head from the injurious influences intended. I fre- 
quently clung to the icy trees with my hands for many min- 
utes during the winter or held balls of snow until my hands 
were almost paralyzed. For some time (probably in the spring 
or autumn of 1895) I put my feet through the iron bars of the 
open window at night in order to expose them to the cold rain. 
As long as I did this the rays could not reach my head, which of 
course was of foremost importance to me, and I felt therefore 





Content of the voices’ talk... 


perfectly well apart from frozen feet.’> I have reason to assume 
that this behavior of mine somehow came to the notice of my 
physicians and caused them to adopt a measure which pro- 
voked my severest displeasure. For a few days I was moved 
from my usual rooms and on my return I found that heavy 
wooden shutters had been fixed before my bedroom window, 
which were locked at night so that my bedroom was in total 
darkness and even the first light of day in the morning could 
hardly penetrate. Naturally the physicians probably had no 
idea of how deeply this measure affected me in my extremely 
hard struggle in defending myself against the attempts directed 
at destroying my reason. But it is understandable that it filled 
me with a deep and long-lasting sense of bitterness. Light, nec- 
essary for every human occupation, had become almost more 
essential for me than my daily bread in my allotted task of at 
all times convincing God, Who does not know the living hu- 
man being, of my undiminished powers of reason. Therefore 
depriving me of artificial light and prolonging the time of natu- 
ral darkness made my position immeasurably more difficult. I 
will not dispute with the physicians whether the measure they 
imposed was necessary from a purely human point of view to 
protect my health from the consequences of harmful actions. 
But here too I cannot help remarking that the means did not 
seem to fit the end. What could possibly have happened to me 
other than contracting a cold? The iron bars gave sufficient 
protection against the danger of falling out of the window, and 
as regards the danger of contracting a cold, one might well 
have waited to see whether human beings’ natural need for 
warmth would not have prevented me from keeping the 





75. For this reason the effect of the one cold shower I was allowed to take in the 
bathroom was almost miraculous. All at once I felt perfectly well and free from all 
the threatening manifestations of miracles by which my head and other parts of 


my body had been visited—although only for a short time. 


MEMOIRS 


windows open too long. But these neither were nor are the de- 
cisive factors. For me the main point was that I could only see 
the physicians as tools in whose nerves decisions were aroused 
by divine rays aimed at furthering the plans directed at de- 
stroying my reason; naturally without the physicians them- 
selves becoming subjectively conscious of this but thinking 
that they were acting simply from human deliberations. I must 
still maintain this opinion because behind every word which 
the physicians and other people speak to me I notice the divine 
influence as revealed to me by the writing-down-material I 
know so well, which I will perhaps try to explain further later 
on. In writing these lines I do not mean to recriminate about 
the past. I harbor no ill-will against any human being for what 
happened in times gone by; happily it has mostly been over- 
come. But I thought it necessary to discuss the affair about the 
window shutters in greater detail to explain the deep mistrust 
of the physicians which filled me for years, and of which they 
possibly noticed some signs in my behavior. 

These shutters (the only ones in the whole wing of the 
Asylum I inhabited} still exist, but have not been closed for a 
long time. Usually such shutters are found only in the cells 
equipped for raving madmen on the ground floor and first floor 
of the round wing of the Asylum. For two years (1896-1898) I 
slept in several of these cells as I will relate later, in which 
time the adverseness of my circumstances was if possible in- 
creased by the darkness. 


The soul’s state of Blessedness 
as a factor in attraction. 


Consequences thereof 


13 


THE MONTH OF November 1895 marks an important time 
in the history of my life and in particular in my own ideas of the 
possible shaping of my future. I remember the period distinctly; 
it coincided with a number of beautiful autumn days when there 
was a heavy morning mist on the Elbe. During that time the 
signs of a transformation into a woman became so marked on 
my body, that I could no longer ignore the imminent goal at 
which the whole development was aiming. In the immediately 
preceding nights my male sexual organ might actually have been 
retracted had I not resolutely set my will against it, still follow- 
ing the stirring of my sense of manly honor; so near completion 
was the miracle. Soul-voluptuousness had become so strong 
that I myself received the impression of a female body, first on 
my arms and hands, later on my legs, bosom, buttocks and other 
parts of my body. I will discuss details in the next chapter. 
Several days’ observations of these events sufficed to change 
the direction of my will completely. Until then I still consid- 
ered it possible that, should my life not have fallen victim to 


MEMOIRS 


one of the innumerable menacing miracles before, it would 
eventually be necessary for me to end it by suicide; apart from 
suicide the only possibility appeared to be some other horrible 
end for me, of a kind unknown among human beings. But now 
I could see beyond doubt that the Order of the World imperi- 
ously demanded my unmanning, whether I personally liked it 
or not, and that therefore it was common sense that nothing 
was left to me but reconcile myself to the thought of being 
transformed into a woman. Nothing of course could be envis- 
aged as a further consequence of unmanning but fertilization 
by divine rays for the purpose of creating new human beings. 
My change of will was facilitated by my not believing at that 
time that apart from myself a real mankind existed; on the 
contrary I thought all the human shapes I saw were only “fleet- 
ing and improvised,” so that there could be no question of any 
ignominy being attached to unmanning. It is true however that 
those rays which were intent on “forsaking” me and which for 
that purpose wanted to destroy my reason, did not fail to make 
a hypocritical appeal to my sense of manly honor; some of the 
phrases, since repeated innumerable times whenever soul- 
voluptuousness appeared, were: “Are you not ashamed in front 
of your wife?,” or still more vulgarly: “Fancy a person who was 
a Senatsprdsident allowing himself to be f....d.” But however 
repellent these voices, however often I had occasion to air my 
just indignation in one way or another during the thousand- 
fold repetition of these phrases, I did not allow myself to be di- 
verted from that behavior which I had come to recognize as 
essential and curative for all parties—myself and the rays. 
Since then I have wholeheartedly inscribed the cultivation 
of femininity on my banner, and I will continue to do so as far 
as consideration of my environment allows, whatever other 
people who are ignorant of the supernatural reasons may think 
of me. I would like to meet the man who, faced with the choice 
of either becoming a demented human being in male habitus 





The soul’s state of Blessedness... 


or a spirited woman, would not prefer the latter. Such and only 
such is the issue for me. The pursuit of my previous profession, 
which I loved wholeheartedly, every other aim of manly ambi- 
tion, and every other use of my intellectual powers in the service 
of mankind, are now all closed to me through the way circum- 
stances have developed; even communication with my wife and 
relatives is denied me apart from occasional visits or exchange 
of letters.’ I must follow a healthy egoism, unperturbed by the 
judgment of other people, which prescribes for me the cultiva- 
tion of femininity in a manner to be described more fully later. 
In this way only am I able to make my physical condition bear- 
able during the day and at night—at least in some measure— 
and obtain the sleep necessary for the recuperation of my nerves; 
high-grade voluptuousness eventually passes into sleep—maybe 
this is even known to medical science. Conducting myself in 
this manner I serve at the same time the express interest of the 
rays, that is God Himself. If I allow God, Who seems to be led by 
the erroneous assumption that my reason can be destroyed and 
Who at present pursues aims which are contrary to the Order 
of the World, to carry on His contrary policy all the time, it 
only leads to senseless noise in my environment, consisting 
mostly of madmen, as the experience of years has proved ir- 
refutably. Only later will I be able to say more about this.” 


75B. {Added March 1903.) As will be seen from the content, the present chapter 
was also written during the time when I was totally isolated behind the walls of 
Sonnenstein; I would therefore have to change some details although the basic 


ideas remain correct. 


76.1 must use particular discretion in contact with my wife, for whom I retain my 
former love in full. I may at times have failed by being too frank in conversation 
or in written communications. It is of course impossible for my wife to under- 
stand my trends of thought fully; it must be difficult for her to retain her previous 
love and admiration for me when she hears that I am preoccupied with ideas of 
possibly being transformed into a woman. I can deplore this, but am unable to 


change it; even here I must guard against false sentimentality. 


MEMOIRS 


At the time when my whole attitude to things changed in 
the manner just described, an essential change also occurred 
in celestial conditions—and for the very same reasons. The 
dissolution in my body of the rays (which are separated from 
the totality of God’s nerves} due to my power of attraction 
amounts to the end of their independent existence, like death 
is to man. It was therefore a matter of course that God should 
make all attempts to avoid the fate of having to perish in my 
body with more and more parts of His totality, and indeed one 
was not very particular in choosing the means of prevention. 
But the attraction lost all its terror for these nerves, if and to 
the extent they met a feeling of soul-voluptuousness in my 
body in which they also participated. They then regained in 
my body a more or less adequate substitute for the lost heav- 
enly Blessedness which itself consisted in enjoyment similar 
to voluptuousness (compare Chapter 1). 

The feeling of soul-voluptuousness however, was not al- 
ways present in my body to the same extent; it reached its full 
development only when the parts of Flechsig’s soul and the 
other “tested” soul parts lay in front and thus all rays were 
united. However there were also alternate periods in which 
soul-voluptuousness was either absent or present to a much 
lesser extent, because the tying-to-celestial-bodies (compare 
Chapter 9} forced the tested souls to draw back from time 
to time. This caused a certain periodicity in the appearance 
of female characteristics on my body of which I will have more 
to say later. But after the influx of God's rays had been constant 
for over a year—in November 1895—soul-voluptuousness be- 
came so great at times that some rays started to like enter- 
ing my body. This was noticeable first with the lower God 
(Ariman)—to some extent identical with the sun (see Chapter 
7), who being nearer partook in soul-voluptuousness much 
more than the upper God (Ormuzd} who remained at a far 
greater distance. 


ao 
166 
eS 


ee 


The soul’s state of Blessedness... 


Up to the change which took place in November 1895, only 
the lower God (Ariman) seemed to have a more intimate 
relationship with Flechsig—perhaps as a human being, perhaps 
as a "tested soul”—so that this plot, provided it existed as 
described in Chapter 2, did not reach higher than to involve 
the lower God (Ariman). Up to that time the upper God 
maintained a more correct, and on the whole more friendly 
attitude in consonance with the Order of the World towards 
me. Now this relationship was reversed. The lower God (Ari- 
man) as stated, did not object to losing himself with part of 
his nerves in my body, because he almost always met soul- 
voluptuousness there; he severed the close relations which 
apparently had existed between him and Fleshsig’s “tested” 
soul; the latter at that time still possessed of a good deal of its 
human intelligence, now formed a sort of hostile alliance 
against me with the upper God. This change in the relation of 
the parties has persisted mostly unchanged to this day. 

The lower God's behavior towards me has since been gener- 
ally friendly, that of the upper God much more hostile. This 
was shown partly in the nature of their miracles—in the course 
of time the miracles of the lower God became more like the 
relatively harmless tricks mentioned in Chapter 2—partly in 
the talk of their respective voices. The voices emanating from 
the lower God—although also no longer the genuine expres- 
sion of direct momentary feeling, but rather an admixture of 
phrases learnt by rote—still differ considerably in form and 
content from those of the upper God. At least their content is 
not only abusive and full of insulting phrases, but amounts to 
a kind of neutral nonsense (for instance “David and Solomon,” 
“salad and radishes,” “little heaps of flour,” etc., are repeated 
again and again). In their form also they are less of a nuisance 
to me because they fit in better with the natural right of man 
to think nothing. In time one grows accustomed to letting 
such nonsensical phrases as those mentioned in parentheses 


Laie 
167 
one 


MEMOIRS 


pass through one’s mind as forms of the “not-thinking-of-any- 
thing-thought.” But the lower God, at least during the first 
years after the change described in this chapter, had at his dis- 
posal also a certain number of phrases which were of actual 
significance and which showed a quite correct (that is the 
same as my own) notion of the causes of the conflict, the 
means of its solution and probable future developments. But as 
said before, these were not genuine expressions of momentary 
feeling, but predetermined concoctions of thoughts spoken 
into my head by senseless voices in tiresome, monotonous rep- 
etition (later on mostly by miraculously produced birds). But 
these phrases were of great interest to me as they permitted 
me to see that God after all, was not so devoid of all under- 
standing for the necessities arising from the Order of the World 
as other observations made Him appear. I will therefore record 
some of these phrases. 

In the first place the change in the grouping of the parties 
which had occurred in consequence of the increase of soul- 
voluptuousness was signalized by the often-repeated phrase 
“Two parties have formed.” Then there were various ways of 
expressing the thought that the whole policy God was pursu- 
ing against me aimed at destroying my reason had failed. Some 
phrases were of a general nature without any personal implica- 
tion, as for instance: “Knowledge and capabilities can in any 
case never be lost” and “Sleep must come”; further: “All non- 
sense (that is, the nonsense of thought reading and falsifying 
thoughts) cancels itself out,” and “Permanent successes are on 
the side of the human being.” Other phrases of the lower God 
were in part addressed to me personally, in part—spoken 
through my head as it were—to his colleague, the upper God; 
the former particularly in the already mentioned phrase: 
“Don’t forget that you are tied to the soul-conception,” the lat- 
ter in phrases such as for instance: “Don’t forget that all repre- 
senting is nonsense,” or “Don’t forget that the end of the world 


ata 
168 
ee) 





The soul’s state of Blessedness... 


is a contradiction in itself,” or “Well, since you have made the 
weather dependent on one human being’s thoughts,” or “Well, 
you have made any holy occupation impossible (for instance 
playing the piano or playing chess, through the manifold inter- 
fering miracles).” On a very few occasions one even went so far 
as to make a kind of confession of one’s own guilt, for instance: 
"If only I had not put you among the fleeting-improvised- 
men,” or “Well, such are the consequences of the renowned 
soul-policy,” or “What is to become of the whole cursed af- 
fair,” or “If only the cursed play-with-human-beings would 
cease.” From time to time the confession was in these words: 
"The feeling is lacking,” that is the feeling we ought to have 
for every decent human being, even for the most abominable 
sinner, considering the means of purification provided in the 
Order of the World. For a time the aim of the whole devel- 
opment was expressed by the lower God in the phrase— 
grammatically incomplete as is so often the case in the soul- 
language: “Hope that voluptuousness reaches a degree,” that is 
to say such a degree that divine rays would lose all interest in 
withdrawing, thus naturally resulting in a solution in conso- 
nance with the Order of the World. However, the lower God 
also had a number of other phrases in readiness which made 
me shudder, in other words I had to exert all my reason to try 
to uphold the conviction that he could not possibly succeed. 
There was talk of “colossal powers” on the part of God’s om- 
nipotence and of “hopeless resistance” on my part; it was 
thought necessary to remind me that the possibility for God to 
withdraw was boundless with the often-repeated phrase: 
“Don’t forget that eternity is boundless.” 

Obviously what I have said above about the changed behav- 
ior of the upper and lower God and about the kind of phrases 
the latter used, contains a tangle of contradictions which can- 
not be unraveled. Almost insuperable difficulties arise even 
for me at every attempt to solve these contradictions; a really 


MEMOIRS 


satisfactory solution would only be possible if one had such 
complete insight into the nature of God which not even I have 
attained who have certainly gained deeper insight than all 
other human beings, because human capacity is limited. I will 
therefore only venture a few tentative remarks in this connec- 
tion with all the reservations arising from the insufficiency of 
the human apparatus for comprehension. Firstly I cannot pre- 
sume that the upper God's intellectual or moral standard is be- 
low that of the lower God. If the latter yet appears to surpass 
the former in that he recognizes what is possible and respects 
the Order of the World, I think this can be accounted for by the 
upper God's greater distance from me compared with the 
lower God's. 

The lower and the upper God apparently have in common 
that they are not able to understand the living human being 
as an organism while they are at a distance; both in particular 
seem to be caught up in the mistaken notion hardly under- 
standable for a human being, that everything which becomes 
appreciable to them from the nerves of a human being in my 
position, mostly only in consequence of the falsification of 
thoughts by the rays, is to be regarded as the manifestation of the 
human being’s own thinking activity; also that cessation of 
thinking, however temporary, and the resulting state in which 
definite thoughts formulated in words do not echo from the 
nerves of a human being in a form appreciable to the rays, im- 
plies that this person’s mental capacities are extinct, or to use 
a common though obviously misunderstood” human expres- 
sion, the advent of dementia. It appears then that God in both 
His forms tends to the erroneous idea that the nerve-language 
resulting from the vibrations of the nerves (compare the begin- 
ning of Chapter 5} is to be regarded as the real language of the 


77. Not even in a dement is there complete cessation of mental activity, only a 
very variable degree of pathological diminution or change of mental activity. 


te al 
170 
Ses) 


The soul’s state of Blessedness... 


human being. Thus, as some excitation of nerves also occurs 
in a sleeping person when dreaming, one failed to distinguish 
between the mental activity of a dreaming and that of a fully 
conscious person using his power of thinking. Naturally I am 
referring only to my own case, that is to say a case in which 
God entered into continual contact by rays with a single hu- 
man being, a contact which could no longer be severed and 
which therefore was contrary to the Order of the World. All 
these erroneous” ideas which have been mentioned seem only 
to be given up when God has come closer and then suddenly 
realizes from my behavior, my activities and perhaps even 
from my conversation with other people, etc., that He is still 
dealing with a human being of completely unimpaired mental 
powers. 

It seems to be impossible for God to draw a lesson for the 
future from such an experience, perhaps because of some qual- 
ities innate in His nature. For these phenomena are repeated in 
exactly the same way year in year out, day after day, particu- 
larly the attempt to withdraw at first sight (in the twinkle of 
an eye) with every pause in my thinking activity (when the 
not-thinking-of-anything-thought starts}, and the assumption 
that I have then succumbed to dementia; this is usually ex- 
pressed in the fatuous phrase “Now he should (scilicet think or 
say) I will resign myself to the fact that I am stupid,” followed 
in senseless monotony like a barrel-organ by all the other 
tasteless forms of speech “Why do you not say it (aloud}?,” or 


78. These faulty notions may be accounted for by the fact that while circumstances 
in consonance with the Order of the World prevail, God deals only with souls 
which either have already ascended to the forecourts of heaven or are still in the 
process of purification (compare Chapter 1}, and besides only occasionally with 
sleeping human beings, who as such (during sleep) naturally also do not make use 
of the loud (human) language. In the relationship of souls among themselves, the 
nerve-language arising from the motion or vibration of nerves (therefore only a 
soft whisper) was in fact the only way of communicating or exchanging ideas. 


MEMOIRS 


“But then for how much longer” (scilicet will your defense 
against the power of the rays still be successful}, etc., etc.; this 
goes on until I proceed to take up some new occupation which 
proves my undiminished mental powers. It is an extremely 
difficult question even for me to explain this inability on the 
part of God to learn by experience. Perhaps one has to think 
of it in this way, that the more correct insight is only gained 
by the most forward nerve endings which are however al- 
ready condemned to dissolve in my body; those parts at a 
distance which start the withdrawal action do not partake in 
this impression or at least not to an extent sufficient for them 
to change their minds.” It therefore seems to me very doubt- 
ful whether it makes any practical difference if, as mentioned 
above, the lower God has included a number of correct ideas 
in his collection of phrases which he makes the voices which 
issue from him speak into my head. In any case these 
thoughts contain nothing new for me, and the upper God 
receiving only a formal acquaintance with them is apparently 
quite unable to assimilate them, that is to change his usual 
mode of action. As the lower God is informed of the true 
state of affairs sooner than the upper God, he possibly allowed 
himself to be led by the idea that rays must speak (compare 
Chapter 9); this being so, it would be preferable that the 
content of these spoken words made sense—even if in endless 
repetition—and not consist of sheer nonsense or frank vulgari- 
ties. A long time ago I formulated the idea that God cannot 


79. One might attempt a different explanation in the following manner. One 
might say—to learn, that is to advance from a lower grade of knowledge to a 
higher grade, is a human conception only applicable to beings whose knowledge 
leaves room for improvement. With respect to my own nature, to whose qualities 
total wisdom belongs as it does to God, the question of learning as such cannot 
arise. But I must admit that even to me this explanation appears somewhat so- 
phisticated, because total wisdom in absolute completeness does not exist in Ged 
and particularly not with respect to His knowledge of living human beings. 


The soul’s state of Blessedness... 


learn by experience, in written notes* as follows: “Every at- 
tempt at an educative influence directed outwards must be 
given up as hopeless", every day which has since passed has 
confirmed the correctness of this opinion. But here again as on 
earlier similar occasions I feel I must protect the reader from 
possible misunderstanding. Religiously minded people who are 
filled with the concept of God’s omnipotence, omniscience 
and loving kindness must find it incomprehensible that God 
should here be depicted as so lowly a Being that He can be 
surpassed both morally and mentally by one single human be- 
ing. However, I must emphasize that my superiority in both 
respects is to be understood in the most relative sense. I main- 
tain such a superiority only as it concerns the condition con- 
trary to the Order of the World originating from permanent 
and indissoluble nerve-contact with one single human being. 
In this respect I am both the more reasonable and the better 
part. Man knows his own nature and in addition I have come 
to know the soul-character so thoroughly through years of 
contact with them as no other human being has before. God 
on the other hand does not know the living human being and 
indeed He had no need to know him, as I have repeatedly 
stressed before. This is by no means irreconcilable with my 
acknowledging God’s eternal wisdom and goodness in all other 





80. These notes are contained in little diaries which I have kept for years; I 
enter under consecutive numbers and with dates, thoughts about impressions 
gained, about possible future developments, etc., in the form of little studies. As I 
consider it probable that my “Memoirs”—the present work—will one day become 
an important source of information about the structure of an entirely new reli- 
gious system, the notes in these diaries may form a valuable supplement to my 
“Memoirs.” They will make it possible to recognize how I gradually fought my 
way to an increasingly correct understanding of supernatural matters. Yet much of 
it will remain beyond other people’s comprehension as I made these notes primar- 
ily for the purpose of clarifying these questions for myself, and they lack the de- 
tailed explanations which would be necessary for other people. 


inate) 
173 
(eae 


MEMOIRS 


respects, particularly in supernatural matters such as the cre- 
ation and evolution of the world."! 

I would like to end this chapter by remarking that now 
at the end of almost five years, things have developed so far 
that the upper God has taken up the same attitude towards me 
as the lower God has done since the change of circumstances 
described in this chapter. The miracles of the upper God are 
beginning to assume the harmless character which mostly has 
characterized the miracles of the lower God. As example I will 
only mention my cigar ash being thrown about on the table or 
on the piano, my mouth and my hands being soiled with food 
during meals, etc. It fills me with satisfaction that I predicted 
this development of things years ago. As proof I will quote the 
relative entry in my diary (number 17 of 8th March 1898}: 


“We would like to express the opinion by way of conjec- 
ture, that perhaps even the posterior Ormuzd will lose 
his interest in disturbing voluptuousness, like the poste- 
rior Ariman has lost it in the last two and a half years, so 
that inner voluptuousness transfigured and ennobled by 
human imagination would offer greater attraction than 
outer f..... g when contrary to the Order of the World.” 


A few explanatory remarks are necessary to understand this 
quotation. “Posterior” Ariman and “posterior” Ormuzd were 
the names given (first by the voices and not by me} to the 


81. As tentatively as I expressed myself above about some of God’s qualities, as 
definitely dare I answer other questions though they have always been counted 
among the thorniest problems since thinking human beings have existed. I refer 
particularly to the relation of God’s omnipotence to human freedom of will, the 
so-called doctrine of predestination, etc. In consequence of revelations and other 
impressions I have received, these questions have become almost as clear to me as 
the sun itself. In view of the deep interest attaching to these questions I will later 


propound the knowledge I gained, at least in outline. 


Tpeewgel 
174 
oe 





The soul’s state of Blessedness... 


lower God and upper God respectively, when one or the other 
had got behind by the other pushing into the foreground, 
which occurred innumerable times daily. “Inner voluptuous- 
ness” is the soul-voluptuousness which originates in my body. 
The expression “outward f..... gcontrary to the Order of the 
World,” refers to my observations that the taking up of putrid 
matter by pure rays is connected with a kind of voluptuous 
sensation for them. The choice of the word “f..... g” is 
not due to my liking for vulgar terms, but having had to listen 
to the words “f..k” and "f..... g” thousands of times, I have 
used the term for short in this little note to indicate the 
behavior of rays which was contrary to the Order of the World. 


4 
175 


“Tested souls”; their fate. 
Personal experiences 


continued 


14 


BESIDES THE EVENTS described in the previous chap- 
ter, certain changes in the heavenly conditions occurred during 
that time and in the following year or two which, although less 
important, are touched on here for the sake of completeness. 
They concern mainly the fate of “tested souls.” These as men- 
tioned before had been very numerous for some time in conse- 
quence of the partition of souls. A large part of them were 
occupied almost only in participating in the so-called “circum- 
ventory movements,” a maneuver invented by the main parts 
of Flechsig’s soul, its purpose was to attack the innocently ap- 
proaching divine rays from behind and so force them to surren- 
der. The picture of this phenomenon is still distinct in my 
memory; but I must forego describing it in words; nor am I 
able to say with certainty whether this phenomenon belonged 
to a time before or after the “tying-to-celestial-bodies.” 

So much is certain, that the great number of “tested soul- 
parts” had eventually become a nuisance to God’s omnipo- 
tence itself. After I had succeeded in drawing down to myself a 





“Tested souls”; their fate... 


considerable part of them, God’s omnipotence started a raid 
among them one particular day; the consequence was that 
from then on Flechsig's soul remained only in one or two 
shapes and von W.’s soul in one single shape. The latter seems 
even to have given up the tying voluntarily; from then on it sat 
for some time—probably a year—mostly in my mouth or eyes, 
troubling me only little, in fact even providing me with some 
entertainment, as I could keep up a kind of exchange of ideas 
with it, in which I however was almost always the giving and 
von W.'s soul the receiving part. I still remember with some 
amusement the very funny impression this soul made when 
finally almost completely without thoughts and limited only 
to visual impressions, it started to join in searching when I 
was looking for some object in my environment, that is to say 
it joined in looking out of my eyes.” About the end of 1897 
von W.’s soul eventually disappeared altogether unnoticed by 
me. I had lately become so accustomed to its company that 
one day, not having thought of it for some time, I suddenly 
realized that it had vanished; I found myself moved to play 
the funeral march from Beethoven’s “Eroica” on the piano in 
honor of its departing. 

Flechsig’s soul is still present as a meager remnant (tied on 
to somewhere); but I have good reason to assume that it long 
ago lost its intelligence, that is to say it is now also totally de- 
void of thoughts, so that it can hardly even enjoy with satis- 
faction its own heavenly existence, which it had unlawfully 
achieved against God’s omnipotence—and this once again rep- 
resents one of the most glowing confirmations of the Order 
of the World, according to which nothing can maintain itself 
permanently which contradicts it. 

And so the previous “tested souls” vanished from the 


82. This gave my eyes a peculiar almost glassy expression. The presence of von 
W's soul was felt as a sort of watery mass which covered my eyeballs. 


en 
177 
es 


MEMOIRS 


scene—with one small exception. Thinking of this event I 
cannot refrain from giving a few details of the very peculiar 
names which they had up to their disappearance. Even if they 
are of little interest to readers, it is important for me to re- 
member them and so keep fresh the terrifying and gruesome 
memories connected with them. The total opposition to God’s 
omnipotence consisting of Flechsig’s and v. W.’s soul parts as 
well as their other party followers (advance guards, etc.) called 
themselves for some time the “so-what-party.” This hack- 
neyed phrase originated from Flechsig’s soul which had the 
habit of answering all questions about what was to become of 
this whole “cursed affair” (that the whole affair had gone ut- 
terly astray seems to have been known to God’s omnipotence) 
with a mocking and indifferent “so what.” This answer again 
is most characteristic of the soul-character; souls after all 
know of no care for the future, but let momentary enjoyment 
suffice. Translated into the human sphere the “so what” of 
Flechsig’s soul would mean “I do not care a damn for the fu- 
ture, as long as I feel well at the moment.” Therefore when 
only two parts of Flechsig’s soul remained, the more distant 
one was called “the posterior Flechsig,” and the one that was a 
little nearer, by the way the one that had always been of 
weaker intelligence, was called the middle “so-what-party.” 
Of von W.’s soul parts the “abdominal putrefaction of von 
W.” has been mentioned earlier; this probably had the most 
impure nerves and therefore exhibited the most abominable 
intent towards me, and towards God’s omnipotence unabashed 
impudence. This found expression in certain classical phrases 
which did not fit in with the movement of my own nerves, nor 
with the accustomed rhythm of the rays, such as “in a way 
this is unbearable,” “permit me,” etc. (the latter expression 
was used when it was to be dislodged from its position]. It 
hung on the opposite wall of my bedroom when I was lying in 
bed. It was almost equaled in impudence of intent by the 





“Tested souls”; their fate... 


so-called “mid-day” von W.; it had this name because it was 
said to have charge of meals, particularly mid-day meals. A 
more decent, almost reasonable, if changeable character, was 
shown by two other of von W.’s soul’s shapes, the “anyhow” 
von W. and the “O damn” von W., both names used by them- 
selves. The phrase “O damn” in particular was a remnant of 
the basic language, in which the words “O damn, that is hard 
to say” were used whenever the souls became aware of a hap- 
pening inconsistent with the Order of the World, for instance 
“O damn, it is extremely hard to say that God allows himself 
toibeifsaes..: iD 

Particularly dangerous for a time was a really very small 
part of von W.’s soul which was called “the scourge of von W.” 
because of a miracle practiced exclusively by him. He used to 
move a little scourge about in my skull, and with it caused se- 
rious destruction and often fairly severe pain. 

During the time of my stay in Dr. Pierson’s Asylum (“the 
Devil’s Kitchen”) there was also a shape of von W.’s soul for 
the formation of which some of my own nerves must have 
been used, because it was called “the little von W.-Schreber.” 
This was the best intentioned of all; “he” sometimes even 
achieved (in his miracles) the so-called “golden drop,” a mira- 
cle usually practiced only by God’s omnipotence in which 
some fluid like balsam was placed on damaged parts of my 
head and elsewhere—I could feel it distinctly—so that all at 
once an immediate curative effect was achieved. 

My outward life was no longer quite as monotonous during 
the time after the change described in Chapter 13 as it had 
been earlier in the period of my immobility; yet there was lit- 
tle variety, as may be expected from living in an Asylum. I still 
spent the best part of my time playing the piano and chess; the 
number of printed scores at my disposal had grown consider- 
ably through presents from my relatives. 

I started to make written notes as I had been provided 


MEMOIRS 


with some colored pencils and later with other writing mate- 
rial; my circumstances were so pitiful that even a pencil or 
a rubber was guarded by me like a real treasure. My note- 
taking consisted at first only of a few unconnected thoughts 
or words which I put down; later—beginning with the year 
1897—I started to keep regular diaries, in which I entered all 
my experiences; earlier—but still in 1896—I was limited to 
meager entries in a small calendar. But I also started to sketch 
my future “Memoirs,” which I had already planned. This 
sketch is contained in a little brown book, entitled “From my 
Life”; it has served me as a welcome support of my memory 
while elaborating the present “Memoirs.” Anybody interested 
in this sketch—which was kept in shorthand—would find 
there many more items which I have not incorporated into my 
“Memoirs”; they show the reader that the content of my reve- 
lations was immeasurably richer than what I could incorporate 
in the limited space of the “Memoirs.” Finally—since the late 
autumn of 1897—I have written down certain observations 
mentioned in footnote 80 and the Little Studies in small note- 
books B, C and I. 

From the start I have had (and I sometimes still have) great 
difficulties with meals which until Easter of this year (1900) I 
took by myself in my room. Nobody can imagine how great 
the difficulties were with which I had to fight; while I was eat- 
ing, miracles were continually produced inside my mouth, and 
even the nonsensical questions continued: “Why don’t you say 
it (aloud)?,” etc., although speaking aloud is impossible when 
one has one’s mouth full of food. My teeth were constantly in 
danger; indeed several times during meals some of my teeth 
were broken by miracle. Frequently during meals a miracle 
was effected of biting my tongue. The hairs of my mustache 
were almost regularly miracled into my mouth with the food 
so that this alone, had no other reason existed, would have 
made me shave it off in August 1896. To shave my mustache 





“Tested souls”; their fate... 


off had become a necessity for me for other reasons, however 
little I liked myself—in day-time—with a clean-shaven face. 
Considering the conditions discussed in Chapter 13 it became 
necessary for me, at least at night-time, to support my imagi- 
nation of being a female, and a mustache would naturally have 
been an insurmountable obstacle for this illusion. While I ate 
alone I had almost regularly to play the piano or to read during 
meal-times because, it was imperative even during meals to 
furnish the distant God® with proof that my mental powers 
were intact; had I not wanted to do this I would have had to eat 
my meals standing up or walking about. 

As mentioned earlier—and anticipating a little in time—I 
passed the nights during the two and a half years from May 
1896 to December 1898 not in the room allotted to me, that is 
in the bedroom adjoining my living-room, but in the padded 
cells for dements on the ground floor and on the first floor of 
the round wing of the Asylum. The reason for this regulation I 
cannot understand even today. It is true during the first years 
of my stay in this Asylum scenes of violence occurred between 
me and other patients, several times also with the attendants. I 
have noted all these instances down; all in all there were about 
ten to twelve such occurrences, the last of which took place on 
the 5th of March 1898; by the way, in all instances concerning 
other patients I was always the attacked party. 


83. After what has been said repeatedly before, for instance in footnote 19, about 
the hierarchy of the realms of God, the reader may have gained some idea of what 
I wish to express with the term “the distant God.” One must not think of God as 
a being limited in space by the confines of a body like a human being, but one has 
to think of Him as Many in One or One in Many. These are not unfounded fig- 
ments of my brain, but I have definite factual evidence for all these assumptions 
{that is to say for the expression “a distant God”], for instance at the time when 
the genuine basic language was current, every anterior leader of rays used to speak 
of the divine rays or of the representatives of the Divinity in his train as “I Who 
am distant.” 


MEMOIRS 


The deeper reasons which led to these scenes of violence I 
will discuss later. At any rate I cannot believe that the doctors 
could have regarded me as a person in general given to mania- 
cal outbursts because of these rare events, as they also had the 
opportunity of observing that during day-time I occupied my- 
self decently, quietly and in accordance with my intellectual 
standing by playing the piano, playing chess, and later reading 
books and newspapers. It is possible that every now and then I 
spoke out aloud at night—which I was forced to do for reasons 
mentioned in footnote 63; it is therefore possible that other pa- 
tients sleeping on the same corridor or above me could occa- 
sionally have had grounds for complaint. But here too it was 
not a question of disturbances of the peace which occurred 
every night, not even most nights, and in any case quite often 
have to suffer similarly through other patients, although my 
bedroom is fairly separate from the other bedrooms. 

I must therefore regard it as an extremely strange regulation 
that I was made to sleep in cells furnished for maniacal patients 
for fully two and a half years with the exception of only a few 
nights; there was nothing in these cells apart from an iron bed- 
stead, a bedpan and some bedding, and over and above this most 
of the time they were completely blacked out by heavy wooden 
shutters. I repeat that I do not wish to raise any complaints 
about the past; however, I cannot but assume that some degree 
of vis inertiae allowed a state of affairs to persist although it 
had become unbearable and despite the fact that the reasons 
which led to such a measure no longer actually existed. 

I think I can fairly maintain that nothing similar happened 
to any other patient in the Asylum, cases of periodic mania are 
locked up in cells but are, as far as I know, kept there only fora 
few weeks. 

Therefore, however little I intend lending the subsequent 
description any personal acrimony, nevertheless an account of 
how unbearably I suffered during this stay in the cells belongs 





“Tested souls”; their fate... 


to the complete picture of the story of my sufferings. My sleep 
is, as shown before, exclusively dependent on the heavenly 
constellations; sleep becomes impossible for me as soon as 
God has withdrawn to too great a distance, which periodically 
happens for half a day or at least several hours. If I then have to 
remain awake, the senseless twaddle of voices in my head 
causes an absolutely unbearable mental martyrdom; added to 
this are, for over twelve months, more or less severe states of 
bellowing to be described later, which occur whenever I can- 
not convince the distant God, who believes I have become de- 
mented, that this is not so. 

But how was I to do this in sleepless nights in the cell in 
which I lacked light as well as any objects which could be used 
for some occupation? It was impossible to remain in bed, and 
groping around in the darkened cell clad only in a shirt, with 
bare feet—as even my slippers were taken away—was naturally 
extremely boring, and in winter-time very cold and further not 
without danger because miracles directed my head against the 
low beams of the cell. Necessity is the mother of invention, 
and so in the course of those years I had recourse to all kinds of 
measures in order to spend the time in a somewhat bearable 
way. Sometimes almost for hours on end I tied knots in the 
four corners of my handkerchief and untied them again, partly 
in bed and partly while walking around recalled aloud some 
memories from my life, counted aloud, particularly in French— 
because questions were also constantly directed at whether I 
could still speak “foreign languages”; produced parts of my 
historical and geographical knowledge, for instance repeated 
all the Russian Governments and French Departments, etc., 
etc. Naturally I did not like to speak aloud as this meant giving 
up my sleep, but frequently I could do nothing else. Very 
painful was the lack of a clock and of matches, because when I 
woke up at night after some sleep I could not tell the time and 
did not know what best to do for the rest of the night. 


ie 
183 
L 


MEMOIRS 


When towards the end of my time in the cells the shutters 
were no longer closed, I occupied myself with observing the 
starry sky, and by means of a map of the stars which I had 
studied during the day I managed to tell the time at night with 
a fair degree of accuracy, just like the people of old. As long as 
the shutters were closed I often thundered against them with 
my fists until my hands were raw; once I succeeded in knock- 
ing a shutter down by force which had already been loosened 
by miracle, with the result that the cross-bar was by miracle 
made to descend on my head with such force that my head and 
my chest were covered with blood. Conditions have latterly 
improved a little by my taking a small metal container into 
the cell with me in which I keep little belongings, a pencil, 
paper, a so-called pocket-chess-board [in English in the origi- 
nal], etc., with which at least during the summer it was possi- 
ble to occupy myself from daybreak on. I have already said that 
I suffered these conditions for two and a half years; in the last 
resort only because human beings did not appreciate supernat- 
ural matters. 


84. This always in the peculiar knowledge not shared by any other human being 
that it was this starry sky itself from which the miracles emanated which dam- 


aged me so multifariously. 





“Play-with-human-beings” and 
“Miracles.” Cries of help. 
Talking birds 


15 


SOME TIME AFTER the change recounted in Chapter 13, 
perhaps at the end of 1895 or the beginning of 1896, I had a 
number of experiences which led me to a critical examination 
of my ideas about the “fleeting-improvised-men,” “play-with- 
human-beings,” and suchlike, in consequence of which I ar- 
rived at a slightly different point of view. 

In particular I remember three events which made me 
hesitate whether what until then I had considered true 
and correct was really so: firstly taking part in the Christ- 
mas festivities of the family of the Director of the Asylum 
Dr. Weber in the year 1895; secondly receiving a letter from 
my sister-in-law in Cologne on the Rhine addressed to me 
and bearing the postmark of Cologne; thirdly a children’s 
procession celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
Peace of Frankfurt—10th of May 1896—which I saw from my 
window passing along a street of a suburb of Pirna which 
runs below it. After these and similar events—soon regular 
correspondence was added and reading newspapers which 


MEMOIRS 


were subscribed for by my relatives—I could no longer doubt 
that a real race of human beings in the same number and 
distribution as before did in fact exist. But this caused diffi- 
culties; how was I to combine this fact with my earlier im- 
pressions apparently pointing to the contrary. This difficulty 
remains even today, and I must confess that I am faced with 
an unsolved riddle, one which is probably insoluble for human 
beings. 

I have no doubt whatever that my early ideas were not 
simply “delusions” and “hallucinations” because even now 
I still receive impressions daily and hourly which make it 
perfectly clear to me that, in Hamlet’s words, there is some- 
thing rotten in the state of Denmark—that is to say in the 
relationship between God and mankind. But how the present 
state of things developed historically, whether by sudden 
changes or gradual transition, and to what extent apart from 
the manifestations of life caused by the influence of rays 
(miracles), manifestations of life occur independently and 
uninfluenced by the rays, remains even for me an obscure 
point. I am quite sure that expressions and phrases like 
“fleeting-improvised-men” and “cursed-play-with-human- 
beings,” the questions: “What is going to happen to this 
cursed affair?,” etc., as well as the talk about “new human 
beings from Schreber’s spirit” did not originate in my head, 
but were spoken into it from outside. This alone would make 
me assume that the ideas connected with them have some 
basis in reality corresponding to some historical events. 
Moreover in the course of the last six years I have un- 
intermittently received impressions—and still receive them 
daily and hourly—which furnish me with incontestable 
proof that everything spoken and done by human beings near 





84B. Compare the Preface. 


Tete 
186 
oes 





“Play-with-human-beings”... 


me is due to the effect of miracles and directly connected 
with the rays coming nearer and alternately striving to with- 
draw again. 

I have already mentioned in Chapter 7 that every word spo- 
ken near me or with me, every human action however small 
which is combined with some noise, for instance opening the 
door-locks on my corridor, pressing the latch on the door of my 
room, the entry of an attendant into my room, etc., is accom- 
panied by a sensation of a painful blow directed at my head; 
the sensation of pain is like a sudden pulling inside my head 
which calls forth a very unpleasant feeling as soon as God has 
withdrawn to an excessive distance, and may be combined 
with the tearing off of part of the bony substance of my skull— 
at least that is how it feels. As long as I talk aloud—in my 
room or in the garden—turned towards God, everything around 
me is deathly quiet and God has no wish to withdraw, as He 
receives the direct impression of the activity of a human being 
in complete possession of his senses. This creates a feeling in 
me at times as if I were moving among walking corpses, so 
completely* seem the people (attendants and patients) sud- 
denly to have lost the capacity to say one single word. The 


85. Conditions during meal-times, which since Easter of this year (1900) I have 
taken at the family table of the Director of the Asylum Dr. Weber, are somewhat 
different; particularly for the reason that a continuous conversation is kept up, 
interrupted only by short pauses. The manifestations described in the text do 
not always appear in the same way, in fact they have undergone certain changes 
in the course of time, particularly in connection with the increased soul- 
voluptuousness. Some of the manifestations vanish temporarily to make room for 
others which in earlier years were either not observed at all or only rarely. This 
refers particularly to the so-called “bellowing,” which I will discuss in more detail 
later. But the basic reason remains the same, namely God's apparently irresistible 
temptation to withdraw as soon as soul-voluptuousness is not met in my body, or 
my speech and my occupation do not provide direct proof of the presence of a hu- 


man being in complete possession of his mental powers. 


MEMOIRS 


same happens as long as my gaze rests on a female being. But 
as soon as I turn my gaze or allow my eyes to be closed by 
miracles, or as soon as I change from talking aloud to silence 
without at the same time starting some mental occupation, in 
other words when I give myself up to thinking nothing, the 
following phenomena which are interrelated occur almost at 
once (at first sight): 


(1) Noises around me, mostly consisting in violent out- 
bursts among the lunatics who of course form the majority of 
those around me; 

(2) In my own person the advent of the bellowing-miracle 
when my muscles serving the processes of respiration are set 
in motion by the lower God (Ariman) in such a way that I am 
forced to emit bellowing noises, unless I try very hard to sup- 
press them; sometimes this bellowing recurs so frequently and 
so quickly that it becomes almost unbearable and at night 
makes it impossible to remain in bed; 

(3) The winds arise, however not uninfluenced by the exist- 
ing state of the weather; but short blasts of wind coinciding 
with pauses in my thinking are quite unmistakable; 

(4) The cries of “help” of those of God’s nerves separated 
from the total mass, sound the more woeful the farther away 
God has withdrawn from me, and the greater therefore the dis- 
tance which those nerves have to travel, obviously in a state of 
some anxiety. 


All these phenomena happen hundreds of times every day; 
I must have observed them in the course of years tens of 
thousands if not hundreds of thousands of times with exactly 
the same regularity. I have repeatedly pointed to the reason. 
Every time my thinking activity ceases God instantly regards 
my mental powers as extinct, the desired destruction of my 


7 
188 
Lye 





“Play-with-human-beings”... 


reason® (the “dementia”) achieved and the possibility of a 
withdrawal thus brought about. 

And so the withdrawal action is started, and to achieve it 
an “interference” produced by miracle in the sense given in 
Chapter 10, page 136. This is the noise mentioned in (1) above. 
Simultaneously and almost immediately the so-called bellow- 
ing-miracle is produced by the lower God ([2] above). It seems 
to serve a double purpose, namely to create by “representing” 
the impression of a person bellowing because he is demented; 
and also to drown by bellowing the inner voices which the 
upper God started so that he could withdraw to a greater dis- 
tance; in this way the lower God, who seems somehow aware 
of the necessity of allowing himself to be attracted, could 
count on a union of all rays and on soul-voluptuousness 
which it causes in my body; in other words he could safeguard 
himself from entering my body without soul-voluptuousness. 
Withdrawal to a greater distance at once causes (see [3]} the 
wind to arise (compare Chapter 1). Nevertheless the upper 
God soon becomes aware that the hoped-for cessation of the 
power of attraction of my nerves has once again not been 
achieved but rather persists undiminished; this causes a state 
of anxiety in those of God's nerves which first became 
separated (see [4]) and is expressed with genuine feeling in cries 
of “help.” It remains a riddle to me that the cries of help are 
apparently not heard by other human beings:”’ the sound which 
reaches my own ear—hundreds of times every day—is so 
definite that it cannot be a hallucination. The genuine “cries 


86. That this was the aim was previously often acknowledged quite openly in the 
phrase which I heard emanating from the upper God “We want to destroy your 
reason.” Of late this phrase has been used less often, because when it is repeated 
time and again it also amounts to a kind of the not-thinking-of-anything-thought. 


87. Compare the remarks at the end of IV of the Postscripts, First Series. 


MEMOIRS 


of help” are always instantly followed by the phrase which 
has been learnt by rote: “If only the cursed cries of help 
would stop.” 

That all signs of life of human beings around me, par- 
ticularly their speech, are caused by miracles (influence of 
rays), is clearly shown also in the content of what is said. I 
must expand this in order to make it clear. As already 
remarked on page 126, Chapter 9, when God started the 
tying-to-celestial-bodies (page 122) He spared not only the 
tested souls which were still about, but also what was left 
of the erstwhile “forecourts of heaven’—that is to say the 
blessed souls of human beings; the purpose was to load them 
with poison of corpses when the power of attraction of my 
nerves caused them to come nearer, and send them out in 
advance as outposts and so slow down the attraction of the 
genuine rays of God. One probably also believed that at least 
one could choke me through the mass of poison of corpses 
which in this manner was daily heaped upon my body, that 
is to say be able to kill me or destroy my reason. These 
nerves (the remnants of the forecourts of heaven) have ap- 
peared for years in the shape of birds created by miracle, 
thereby manifesting a mysterious connection with the in- 
nermost nature of divine creation; insofar they are unfath- 
omable even to me. But the fact itself that the nerves which 
are inside these birds are remnants (single nerves) of souls of 
human beings who had become blessed is absolutely certain 
because of my observations repeated thousands of times every 
day for years. 

I recognize the individual nerves exactly by the tone of 
their voices from years of hearing them; I know exactly which 
of the senseless phrases learnt by rote I can expect of each 
one of them, according to whether they are emitted from the 
camp of the lower God or from that of the upper God (pro- 
duced by miracle by the latter or the former). Their property as 


Geerall 
190 
in 





“Play-with-human-beings”... 


erstwhile human nerves is evidenced by the fact that all the 
miraculously produced birds without exception, whenever 
they have completely unloaded the poison of corpses which 
they carry, that is to say when they have reeled off the phrases 
drummed into them, then express in human sounds the gen- 
uine feeling of well-being in the soul-voluptuousness of my 
body which they share, with the words “Damned fellow”’® 
or “Somehow damned,” the only words in which they are 
still capable of giving expression to genuine feeling. They have 
not the least understanding of what they have spoken before, 
i.e. for the phrases learnt by rote—to retain this expression 
which naturally is only to be understood figuratively; they 
reel them off without knowing the sense of the words; it 
seems that otherwise their intelligence is no higher than that 
of natural birds. 

I cannot say how their nerves are made to vibrate in such a 
manner that sounds spoken or more correctly lisped by them 
sound like human words, of which the phrases learnt by rote 
are composed: I therefore cannot explain the technicalities of 
the matter, but I presume that it is a question of supernatural 
matters which therefore are completely incomprehensible to 
human beings.” But their effect is well known to me from years 
of experience; it consists in the nerves of the miraculously 


88. The words “damned fellow” are here not used in any derogatory sense, in fact 
just the reverse, as was the rule in the basic language, namely in that of joyous 
tribute or admiration. 


89. (Written some days later than the above text.) Perhaps it is a similar process to 
the one (see page 147/148 of Chapter 11) attempted with my own nerves, of which 
I became aware in the form of transitory dementing or diminution of my powers 
of thinking. One could imagine that the covering of the nerves of birds with the 
poison of corpses robs them of their natural capacity to vibrate, that is to say of 
their natural feeling, and in a way tends to stretch them; the result is that they are 
only able to perform the long-drawn-out vibrations corresponding to human 
words which have lately been spoken extremely slowly. 


eee 
191 
(eae 


MEMOIRS 


created birds being made immune against all sensation which 
they would otherwise have when entering my body, partic- 
ularly against soul-voluptuousness or visual impressions, as 
long as they are occupied with reeling off the phrases drummed 
into them (learnt by rote), just as if they entered into me blind- 
folded or with their natural capacity for feeling somehow sus- 
pended. This after all is the purpose of the whole business and 
also the reason for the tempo of these automatic phrases being 
more and more slowed down in the course of years—in propor- 
tion to the increase of soul-voluptuousness: the destructive 
power of the poison of corpses carried by the entering voices 
was to be maintained as long as possible. With it, however, a 
most peculiar phenomenon arose which is of the greatest im- 
portance for the extent of the damage the voices or rays con- 
cerned cause in my body. 

It has already been mentioned that the miraculously cre- 
ated birds do not understand the meaning of the words they 
speak; but apparently they have a natural sensitivity for simi- 
larity of sounds. Therefore if, while reeling off the automatic 
phrases, they perceive either in the vibrations of my own 
nerves (my thoughts) or in speech of people around me, words 
which sound the same or similar to their own phrases, they ap- 
parently experience surprise and in a way fall for the similarity 
in sound; in other words the surprise makes them forget the 
rest of their mechanical phrases and they suddenly pass over 
into genuine feeling. 

It has already been said that the sounds need not be com- 
pletely identical; a similarity suffices, as in any case the birds 
do not understand the sense of the words; therefore it matters 
little to them—in order to give some examples—whether one 
speaks of 

“Santiago” or “Carthago” 

“Chinesenthum” or “Jesum Christum” 

"Abendroth” or “Athemnoth” 


(ea) 
192 
a a 





“Play-with-human-beings”.., 


“Ariman” or “Ackermann” 

“Briefbeschwerer” or “Herr Priifer schwért.” 
etc., etc.” 

To confuse these talking birds by deliberately throwing in 
similar sounding words became a kind of pastime in the 
voices’ almost unbearably tedious twaddle which afforded me 
a somewhat queer amusement. However droll this may sound 
the matter also has its serious side. The upper and lower Gods 
who also know that the miraculously created birds fall for sim- 
ilar sounds, use this peculiarity as a trump card against each 
other. Each wants to hold back and push the other forward; 
whenever the birds fall for similarity of sound, the attraction 
of that part is increased from whose camp the voices emanate. 
Thus the upper God likes to make persons around me say 
those words which belong to the writing-down-material and to 
the voices of the lower God and vice versa, while I for my part, 
aiming at a union of all rays and so at a uniform attraction, al- 
ways have to counteract these efforts. Here too I could furnish 
as many examples as there are grains of sand in the sea. 

To mention only a few: “electric light” and “railways,” as 
well as—in the connection mentioned on page 169 Chapter 
13—the “colossal powers” and the “hopeless resistance” 
belong to the writing-down-material of the lower God. The 
upper God therefore causes a conversation carried on in my 
presence—also during meals at the Director's table—to turn 
to “electric railways,” everything is found “colossal” and at 
every opportune or inopportune moment one speaks of 
“hopes” so frequently that it is astounding and excludes all 
possibility of coincidence. This alone—apart from much else— 
constitutes absolute proof for me that the nerves of the human 


90. These examples are taken from the actual writing-down or speech-material,; 
“Herr Priifer,” the name of a patient in this Asylum, I used to hear often. I could 
multiply the examples a hundred- or thousand-fold but will let the above suffice. 


Fo al 
193 
ee) 


MEMOIRS 


beings who use these words are made to do so through the in- 
fluence of rays (miracles)—naturally without their knowing it; 
in other words it is proof of the reality of the so-called “play- 
with-human-beings” about which the lower God used to speak 
innumerable times in earlier years. Here too I am conscious of 
how incredible all this must seem to other human beings; but 
what I said above is strengthened by hourly and daily experi- 
ences, in every place and at every opportunity so overwhelm- 
ingly, that it precludes any doubt for me in the objectivity of 
these circumstances. I may perhaps later go into further details. 

I want to add something about the birds created by miracle; 
it is queer that the individual nerves or souls which are in 
them appear in the shape of different kinds of birds according 
to the season of the year. The same nerves are in the spring 
contained in the bodies of finches or other singing birds, in the 
summer in those of swallows, and in winter in those of spar- 
rows or crows. I have no doubt about the identity of the souls 
concerned because I know the tone of their voices well, and I 
recognize the phrases I regularly hear from them and which 
have, so to speak, been crammed into them.” 

This naturally leads to the question whether they can pos- 
sibly have a continual life or whether they have to be created 
anew by miracles every day or anyway at longer intervals of 
time. I can only raise but not answer this question. I observe 
that the miraculously created birds feed and empty themselves 


92. The expression “crammed in” which occurred to me only during writing, 
seems to express the relation even better than the previously used expressions 
“learnt by rote” and “drummed in.” The latter expressions could make one think 
that the miraculously created birds were aware of the sense of the words; but that 
is not so. Their speech in respect of the crammed in phrases is not even as ad- 
vanced as a parrot’s. The parrot repeats words learnt on his own impulse, in other 
words of his own free will. On the other hand the miraculously created birds must 
reel off the crammed in phrases without any regard to time or circumstance and 
irrespective of whether they want to or not. 





“Play-with-human-beings”., , 


in the manner of natural birds; it would therefore be possible 
that the miraculously created state is maintained for a time 
by taking in nourishment; I have also repeatedly observed 
them building nests in the spring which appears to point to 
some powers of reproduction. Their language on the other 
hand makes it certain for me that in other respects they are 
not completely natural birds. They are very numerous, appar- 
ently appear in hundreds, so that I dare not give any definite 
estimate of their number. From their spoken phrases they can 
easily be distinguished into two groups, one emanating from 
the upper and the other from the lower God. 

Of the lower God’s group one soul in bird’s form is usually 
around me; for years therefore the voices have called it “my lit- 
tle friend.” In the spring it usually appears as a woodpecker or 
blackbird, in the summer as a swallow and in the winter as a 
sparrow. The joking title “picus, the woodpecker,” is used by the 
other voices even when it appears as a blackbird, swallow or 
sparrow. I know exactly the numerous phrases given it to repeat 
constantly in the course of the years, and I have often made 
lists of them as also of those of the other miraculously created 
birds; they always proved correct. To a large number of the 
other bird-souls I jokingly gave girls’ names in order to distin- 
guish them, because all of them can best be compared to little 
girls in their curiosity, their inclination to voluptuousness, etc. 
These girls’ names were then taken up by God's rays and used 
for the respective bird-souls concerned. To the miraculously 
created birds belong all fairly fast flying birds, particularly all 
singing birds, swallows, sparrows, crows, etc.; of these species 
of birds I have never once during these years seen a single 
specimen which did not speak. On both the occasions when I 
drove in a carriage this summer (1900)* they accompanied me 





93. Up till then, that is to say foralmost six years, I had never left the walls of the 
Asylum. 


= 
195 


MEMOIRS 


the whole way. On the other hand the pigeons in the court of 
this Asylum do not speak, neither as far as I have observed a 
canary kept in the servants’ quarters, nor the chicken, geese 
and ducks which I have seen both from my window on the 
plots of land lying below the Asylum, and on the two men- 
tioned excursions in villages through which I passed; I must 
therefore presume that these were simply natural birds. The 
whole phenomenon of the talking birds is so marvelous and 
like a fairy tale that I would be most interested to observe bird 
life in other parts of the country; I cannot presume that leafy 
woods farther away totally lack a bird population. 





93B. [Added March 1903.} The talking of all free flying birds has persisted without 
interruption in the past years in which I frequently changed my residence, and it 
persists to this day. Besides I would now prefer the expression “talking bird” to 
“miraculously created bird” which is used in the text. Earlier on I thought I could 
not explain the talking of the birds other than by assuming that they were as such 
created by miracle, that is to say were created anew each time. After what I have 
observed meantime I consider it more likely that they were birds produced by nat- 
ural reproduction, into whose bodies the remnants of the “forecourts of heaven,” 
that is to say erstwhile blessed human souls, had been inserted in some supernat- 
ural way or were inserted anew each time. But that these souls {nerves} are actu- 
ally inside the bodies of these birds (perhaps in addition to the nerves which these 
birds naturally possess and in any case without awareness of their previous iden- 
tity) remains as before without any doubt for me for reasons developed in the text. 





Compulsive thinking. Its 
effects and manifestation 


16 


IN THE PREVIOUS chapters I described the changes in 
my outward life during the past years and the forms the battle 
of annihilation assumed which divine rays led against me. I 
will now add some more about the forms—also vastly changed 
—of the constant compulsive thinking. Compulsive thinking 
has been defined in Chapter 5 as having to think continually; 
this contravenes man’s natural right of mental relaxation, of 
temporary rest from mental activity through thinking nothing, 
or as the expression goes in the basic language, it disturbs the 
“basis” of a human being. My nerves are influenced by the 
rays to vibrate corresponding to certain human words; their 
choice therefore is not subject to my own will, but is due to 
an influence exerted on me from without. From the beginning 
the system of not-finishing-a-sentence prevailed, that is to 
say the vibrations caused in my nerves and the words so pro- 
duced contain not mainly finished thoughts, but unfinished 
ideas, or only fragments of ideas, which my nerves have to 
supplement to make up the sense. It is in the nature of nerves 


Gina 
197 
a 52) 


MEMOIRS 


that if unconnected words or started phrases are thrown into 
them, they automatically attempt to complete them to fin- 
ished thoughts satisfactory to the human mind. 

The system of not-finishing-a-sentence became more and 
more prevalent in the course of years, the more the souls 
lacked their own thoughts. In particular, for years single con- 
junctions or adverbs have been spoken into my nerves thou- 
sands of times; these ought only to introduce clauses, but it is 
left to my nerves to complete them in a manner satisfactory to 
a thinking mind. Thus for years I have heard daily in hundred- 
fold repetition incoherent words spoken into my nerves with- 
out any context, such as “Why not?,” “Why, if,” “Why, 
because I,” “Be it,” “With respect to him” (that is to say that 
something or other has to be thought or said with respect to 
myself); further an absolutely senseless “Oh” thrown into my 
nerves; finally certain fragments of sentences which were ear- 
lier on expressed completely; as for instance 


1. “Now I shall,” 

2. You were to,” 

3. “I shall,” 

4. “It will be,” 

5. “This of course was,” 
6. “Lacking now is,” 


etc. In order to give the reader some idea of the original mean- 
ing of these incomplete phrases I will add the way they used to 
be completed, but are now omitted and left to be completed by 
my nerves. The phrases ought to have been: 


1. Now I shall resign myself to being stupid; 

2. You were to be represented as denying God, as given to 
voluptuous excesses, etc.; 

3. I shall have to think about that first; 


ae) 
198 
ee 





Compulsive thinking... 


4. It will be done now, the joint of pork; 

5. This of course was too much from the soul’s point of 
view; 

6. Lacking now is only the leading idea, that is—we, the 
rays, have no thoughts. 


The rather tasteless phrase about the joint of pork (number 
4) is due to myself having used years ago the figure of speech 
“done like a joint of pork” in the nerve-language. This phrase 
was seized on and became a constantly recurring part of the 
speech-material. The “joint of pork” I was to refer to myself: it 
was meant to express that I was done, i.e. that my power of re- 
sistance against the attacks on my reason by the rays must by 
now be exhausted. 

The purpose of not-finishing-a-sentence is consistent with 
God's attitude to me throughout: to prevent dissolution in my 
body which would necessarily result from its attraction. While 
conditions prevailed which were at least somehow in conso- 
nance with the Order of the World, that is before tying-to-rays 
and tying-to-celestial-bodies was started (compare Chapter 9}, 
a momentary uniform feeling was enough to make the freely 
suspended souls jump down from the sky into my mouth, thus 
ending their independent existence; an event, as mentioned in 
Chapter 7, page 86, I actually experienced repeatedly. But mere 
“intellectual deliberation” had the same effect; whenever ex- 
pressed in a grammatically complete sentence, the rays would 
be led straight to me, and entering my body (though capable of 
withdrawing} temporarily increase its soul-voluptuousness. 
Not-finishing-a-sentence has apparently the effect that the 
rays are, as it were, held up half way, and could therefore with- 
draw before having added to soul-voluptuousness in my body; 
but even this does not permanently prevent the attraction 
completely; it only slows it down. 

It is hard to give a picture of the mental strain the 


MEMOTRS 


compulsive thinking imposed on me particularly after it had 
become so much worse, and what mental torture I had to suf- 
fer. During the first years my nerves indeed seemed irresistibly 
compelled to continue” each started clause to the satisfaction 
of the human mind, much as in ordinary human intercourse 
an answer is regularly given to somebody’s question. 

I will give an example to illustrate how such a need is in- 
herent in the nature of human nerves. Consider the case of par- 
ents or teachers being present during a school examination of 
their children. If they follow the examination attentively they 
will automatically answer every question in their mind, per- 
haps only in the form: “I am not at all sure whether the chil- 
dren will know this.” Of course there is no mental compulsion 
for parents or teachers, they have only to divert their attention 
from the proceeding examination towards something else in 
their environment to spare their nerves this strain. This is the 
essential difference between this example and my case. The 
questions or querying particles spoken into my nerves compel 
my mind to work by setting the corresponding nerves in vibra- 
tion, in a way that they cannot possibly escape the impulse to 
think. I must leave undecided whether the expression I chose 
of my nerves being set in corresponding vibrations by the rays, 
covers the circumstances correctly; what I directly feel is that 
the talking voices (lately in particular the voices of the talking 
birds) as inner voices move like long threads into my head and 
there cause a painful feeling of tension through the poison of 
corpses which they deposit. 

In contra-distinction to these inner voices I hear outer 
voices particularly spoken by birds, which come to me from 
outside, from the birds’ throats. However, in both cases my 
nerves cannot avoid the sound of the spoken words; the 





95. To do this immediately at first sight {in the twinkle of an eye], as the stimula- 
tion of nerves demanded, was called "the capacity to answer at first sight.” 





Compulsive thinking... 


stimulation of my nerves follows automatically and compels 
me to think on when I hear questions or incomplete thoughts. 
In earlier years my nerves simply had to think on, to answer 
questions, to complete broken-off sentences, etc. Only later 
was I gradually able to accustom my nerves (my “basis” to ig- 
noring the stimulation which forced them to think on, by sim- 
ply repeating the words and phrases and thus turning them 
into not-thinking-of-anything-thoughts. I have done that for a 
long time now with conjunctions and adverbs which would 
need a full clause for their completion. If I hear for instance 
“Why, because I,” or “Be it,” I repeat these words for as long as 
possible without attempting to complete the sense by trying to 
connect them with what I thought before. 

I proceed in the same manner when attempts are made 
with the words “If only my” to compel my nerves to develop 
ideas of fear, not really present in my mind but falsely imputed 
to me. I know what can be “expected” to follow—because 
as a rule the corresponding miracle happens simultaneously 
and I feel it on my body; the intended continuation is some- 
times “If only my voluptuousness were not disturbed,” 
sometimes “If only my boots were not removed by mira- 
cle,” sometimes “If only my nose, my eyes, my knee-cap, my 
skull, etc., would not be affected by miracles.” 

Since my nerves have become accustomed to suppress the 
corresponding stimulation, I no longer elaborate in words 
the nonsense to which these falsified ideas lead; I am satis- 
fied to keep on repeating the same words “If only my” without 
adding anything to them. In ordinary conversation of course 
everybody would simply counter “If only my” with “What 
do you really mean,” or perhaps would use abusive language in 
self-defense. This is very difficult for me because the rays 
regularly answer “We have had this before” (with the ef- 
fect mentioned in Chapter 9). It would in any case be un- 
endurable in the long run to submit nerves all day long 


MEMOIRS 


to the counter-question “What do you really mean,” or to 
abusive language.” 

The infringement of the freedom of human thinking or more 
correctly thinking nothing, which constitutes the essence of 
compulsive thinking, became more unbearable in the course 
of years with the slowing down of the talk of the voices. This 
is connected with the increased soul-voluptuousness of my 
body and—despite all writing-down—with the great shortage 
of speech-material at the disposal of the rays with which to 
bridge the vast distances separating the stars, where they are 
suspended, from my body. 

No one who has not personally experienced these phe- 
nomena like I have can have any idea of the extent to 
which speech has slowed down. To say “But naturally” is 
spoken B.b.b.u.u.u.t.t.t. n.n.n.a.a.a.t.t.t.uu.uw0111.a.4a.a.L)Ly.y.y, 
or “Why do you not then shit?” W.w.w.h.h.hy.y.y 


96. One can only get an idea of the enormous infringement of man’s most primitive 
tights which compulsive thinking constitutes and of how my patience was tested 
beyond all human conception, when one pictures a human being behaving to an- 
other human being in human language in the way that rays behave to me to this 
day in the nerve-language. Imagine a human being planting himself before another 
and molesting him all day long with unconnected phrases such as the rays use to- 
wards me {“If only my,” “This then was only,” “You are to," etc.). Can one expect 
anything else of a person spoken to in this manner but that he would throw the 
other out of the house with a few fitting words of abuse? I also ought to have the 
right of being master in my own head against the intrusion of strangers. But this is 
not possible as regards the rays, because I am not in a position to prevent their in- 
fluence on my nerves; this rests on God’s power of miracles. The human language 
(spoken aloud) which is the ultima ratio for preserving the sanctity of my house 
cannot always be used, partly out of consideration for my environment, partly be- 
cause continuous talking aloud would make every sensible occupation impossi- 
ble; finally because at night it would prevent sleep. Hence one tries to provoke me 
to talk aloud with the question: “Why do you not say it (aloud}?” or by means of 
insulting phrases (compare Chapter 9). Of late, having become increasingly clear 
about these things, I have in fact not refrained from making use of speaking aloud 
whenever the opportunity arose both in conversation and when I am alone. 





Compulsive thinking... 


d.d.d.o.o.o........... ; and each requires perhaps thirty to 
sixty seconds to be completed. This would be bound to cause 
such nervous impatience in every human being, not like my- 
self more and more inventive in using methods of defense, as 
to make him jump out of his skin, a faint idea of the nervous 
unrest caused is perhaps the example of a Judge or teacher 
always listening to a mentally dull witness or a stuttering 
scholar, who despite all attempts cannot clearly get out what 
he is asked or wants to say. 

Playing the piano and reading books and newspapers is—as 
far as the state of my head allows—my main defense, which 
makes even the most drawn-out voices finally perish; at night 
when this is not easily done or in day-time when the mind 
requires a change of occupation, I usually found committing 
poems to memory a successful remedy. I learnt a great number 
of poems by heart particularly Schiller’s ballads, long sections 
of Schiller’s and Goethe’s dramas, as well as arias from operas 
and humorous poems, amongst others from Max and Moritz, 
Struwelpeter and Spekter’s fables, which I then recite in si- 
lence on the quiet verbatim. Their value as poetry naturally 
does not matter; however insignificant the rhymes, even ob- 
scene verses are worth their weight in gold as mental nour- 
ishment compared with the terrible nonsense my nerves are 
otherwise forced to listen to. 

Even while reciting poems I have to combat difficulties 
which at times reduce their effectiveness; miracles aimed at 
scattering my thoughts act on my nerves and make it im- 
possible to find the continuation of a poem learnt by heart; or 
when the most persistent inner voices have at last been si- 
lenced by the recital of longer poems and I have reached a state 
of great soul-voluptuousness through union of all rays, the 
lower God starts the bellowing-miracle until I am so breath- 
less that I cannot continue reciting the poems even softly. 1am 
therefore forced to change the systems much in the same way 


mee 
203 
ae 


MEMOIRS 


as externally new systems are continually started (by God’s 
omnipotence) to slow down the attraction of rays and prevent 
the union of all rays necessary for sleep or complete soul- 
voluptuousness. Recently I found counting aloud up to a large 
figure of great help, but this is naturally very boring for any 
length of time. When severe bodily pain sets in or persistent 
bellowing occurs, the last remaining remedy is swearing aloud 
which I have to do occasionally, but which I sincerely hope 
will become less and less necessary in future. 

All the above-described phenomena have changed in the 
course of years and are still subject to change in relation to 
the degree of soul-voluptuousness present at a given time 
and the distance to which God has withdrawn. But on the 
whole the predictions I made years ago become truer every 
day; the following excerpt from Little Study XIII, in notebook 
B, already mentioned in footnote 80, may serve as proof: 


16TH JANUARY 1898 


“In the meantime, that is to say during the years or 
decades which may pass until unmanning is completed, 
the direction of our policy is in general clear. There is no 
doubt whatever that things will become easier for us 
with every year, every day, every week, possible set- 
backs excepted, which are connected with the fact that 
elsewhere the necessary insight is lacking and will prob- 
ably never come about owing to the organization of 
God's realms and the soul-character; therefore weak ef- 
forts will always be made to avoid the solution which is 
in consonance with the Order of the World.” 


Because of its very characteristic meaning I must devote a 
few more remarks to the above-mentioned question “Why do 
you then not shit?,” however indelicate the subject may be. 





Compulsive thinking... 


Like everything else in my body, the need to empty myself is 
also called forth by miracles; this is done by forcing the feces 
in the bowel forwards (sometimes also backwards) and when 
owing to previous evacuation there is insufficient material 
present, the small remnants in the bowel are smeared on my 
backside. This miracle, initiated by the upper God, is repeated 
every day at least several dozen times. It is connected with the 
idea which is quite incomprehensible for human beings and 
can only be explained by God’s complete lack of knowledge of 
the living human being as an organism, that “sh..... “istoa 
certain extent the final act; that is to say when the miracles 
produce the urge to sh.. the goal of destroying my reason is 
reached, and so the possibility afforded for a final withdrawal 
of the rays. Trying to trace the origin of this idea one must as- 
sume some misunderstanding of the symbolic meaning of the 
act of defecation, namely that he who entered into a special re- 
lationship to divine rays as I have is to a certain extent entitled 
tosh.. onall the world. 

At the same time, however, the whole perfidy” of the 
policy conducted towards me is clear. Whenever the need to 
defecate is produced by miracle, some other person in my envi- 
ronment is sent to the lavatory—by exciting the nerves of the 
person concerned-—in order to prevent me from emptying my- 
self; this I have observed so frequently (thousands of times) 
and so regularly that one can exclude any thought of it being 
coincidence. The question “Why do you then not sh.. 2” is fol- 
lowed by the capital answer “Because I am somehow stupid.” 
The pen almost resists writing down the fantastic nonsense 


97. In using the expression “perfidy” it will hardly be necessary to remind the 
reader of my previously developed ideas (the end of Chapter 5; footnote 74, 
Chapter 11, p. 173, Chapter 13} according to which God acts towards me in self- 
defense—although of His own making—and therefore considers Himself above 
every human and moral consideration. 





MEMOIRS 


that God in His blindness and lack of knowledge of human 
nature in fact goes so far that He assumes a human being could 
exist who—something every animal is capable of doing— 
cannot sh.. for sheer stupidity. When I do empty myself— 
usually in a bucket because I almost always find the lavatory 
occupied—this act is always combined with a very strong de- 
velopment of soul-voluptuousness. Liberation from the pres- 
sure of feces present in the guts creates an intense feeling of 
well-being, particularly for the nerves of voluptuousness; the 
same happens when I pass water. For that reason all rays have 
always and without exception been united during evacuation 
and passing water; and for this very reason, namely to avoid a 
union of all rays, one attempts (usually unsuccessfully) to mir- 
acle away the urge. 


4 
206 





Continuation of the above; 
“Picturing” in the sense of 


the soul-language 


17 


FROM THE ACCOUNT in the previous chapter, the 
reader will have gained the impression that the trials to which 
I am subjected by compulsive thinking have in many respects 
far exceeded the measure of demands which are usually made 
on human capacity and human patience. To be quite truthful I 
must add that there were also moments which at least occa- 
sionally offered a kind of recompense for the wrong done me. 
Apart from knowledge of supernatural matters gained in the 
course of years which I would not erase from my memory for 
all the gold on earth, I must also mention the mentally stimu- 
lating effect compulsive thinking has had on me. Throwing 
into my nerves unconnected conjunctions expressing causal or 
other relations (“Why only,” “Why because,” “Why because 
I,” “Let it be then,” “At least,” etc.) forced me to ponder many 
things usually passed over by human beings, which made me 
think more deeply. All human activity near me, every view of 
nature in the garden or from my windowstirs certain thoughts 
in me; when I then hear “Why only” or “Why because” spoken 


7 
207 
4 





MEMOIRS 


into my nerves, I am forced or at least stimulated in immea- 
surably greater degree than other human beings to contem- 
plate the reason or purpose behind them. 

As one of many examples: while writing these lines a new 
house is being built in the Asylum garden and a new stove 
installed in the room adjoining mine. Watching this work the 
idea automatically arises: that man or various workmen are 
now occupied in doing this or that; if simultaneously with 
this thought a “And why” or “Why because” is spoken into 
my nerves, I am unavoidably forced to give myself an account 
of the reason and purpose of every single job. Similar things 
happened innumerable times in the course of years; reading 
books and newspapers particularly stimulates new thoughts. 
Being continually forced to trace the causal relation of every 
happening, every feeling, and every idea has given me gradu- 
ally deeper insight into the essence of almost all natural 
phenomena and aspects of human activity in art, science, etc., 
than is achieved by people who do not think it worth while 
to think about ordinary everyday occurrences. It is often not 
at all easy, particularly in the case of sensations and feelings, 
to account for reasons (“But why”) satisfactorily; indeed most 
often the question why is inept, as for instance in such sen- 
tences as “This rose has a nice smell” or “This poem has 
a beautiful poetical expression” or “This is a magnificent 
painting” or “This piece of music is particularly melodious.” 
Nevertheless this question is stimulated in me by the voices 
and moves me to think; but as I said before continual thinking 
is too wearying and I have though slowly learnt to extricate 
myself from it to some extent. Of course he who believes in 
the divine creation of the world can naturally always adduce as 
the last cause of all things and happenings the reason “Because 
God has created the world.” But between this fact and the indi- 
vidual processes of life there are innumerable intermediate 
links which are eminintly interesting to work out. Stimulated 





Continuation of the above... 


by compulsive thinking I occupied myself a great deal with et- 
ymological questions which I must say had interested me in 
earlier days of health. 

Finally a very ordinary event to illustrate the above: I meet 
a person I know by the name of Schneider. Seeing him the 
thought automatically arises “This man’s name is Schneider” 
or This is Mr. Schneider.” With it “But why” or “Why because” 
also resounds in my nerves. In ordinary human contact the an- 
swer would probably be: “Why! What a silly question, the 
man’s name is simply Schneider.” But my nerves were unable 
or almost unable to behave like this. Their peace is disturbed 
once the question is put why this man should be Mr. Schneider 
or why he is called Mr. Schneider. This very peculiar question 
“why” occupies my nerves automatically—particularly if the 
question is repeated several times—until their thinking is di- 
verted in another direction. My nerves perhaps answer first: 
Well, the man’s name is Schneider because his father was also 
called Schneider. But this trivial answer does not really pacify 
my nerves. Another chain of thought starts about why giving 
of names was introduced at all among people, its various forms 
among different peoples at different times, and the various cir- 
cumstances (profession, origin, particular physical qualities, 
etc.), which gave rise to them. Thus an extremely simple ob- 
servation under the pressure of compulsive thinking becomes 
the starting point of a very considerable mental task, usually 
not without bearing fruit. 

Another interesting phenomenon connected with the ray- 
communication—the real cause of compulsive thinking—is 
the so-called “picturing,” which I have touched on earlier in 
Chapter 5. Perhaps nobody but myself, not even science, 
knows that man retains all recollections in his memory, by 
virtue of lasting impressions on his nerves, as pictures in his 
head. Because my inner nervous system is illuminated by rays, 
these pictures can be voluntarily reproduced; this in fact is the 





MEMOIRS 


nature of “picturing.” I expressed this thought earlier (in my 
Little Studies XLIX of 29th October 1898} in a different form: 
"To picture (in the sense of the soul-language) is the con- 
scious use of the human imagination for the purpose of pro- 
ducing pictures (predominantly pictures of recollections} in 
one’s head, which can then be looked at by rays.”” By vivid 
imagination I can produce pictures of all recollections from my 
life, of persons, animals and plants, of all sorts of objects in na- 
ture and objects of daily use, so that these images become visi- 
ble either inside my head or if I wish, outside, where I want 
them to be seen by my own nerves and by the rays. I can do the 
same with weather phenomena and other events; I can for ex- 
ample let it rain or let lightning strike—this is a particularly 
effective form of “picturing,” because the weather and particu- 
larly lightning are considered by the rays manifestations of the 
divine gift of miracles; I can also let a house go up in smoke 


98. As the continuation of the above-mentioned “Little Study” which deals with 
picturing in the human sense may be of interest it is appended here: 

Picturing in the human sense is the representation of objects on a surface (in 
contra-distinction to corporeal, plastic representation) without color [in contra- 
distinction to painting; or one could also say that painting is the producing of pic- 
tures in color}, and especially either mere copying {drawing from nature), that is 
reproducing objects actually seen in the outer world, in which human imagina- 
tion plays no part, or the creation of pictures representing objects not yet existing 
in the outer world, for either purely artistic purposes (representation of beauty, to 
give oneself and others pleasure} or for practical purposes, that is in order to pro- 
duce objects which correspond to these pictures (a model, the plan of a building, 
etc.], the latter implying imagination (fantasy derived from ¢aivesici|. The Ger- 
man word [Einbildungskraft) indicates clearly the notion of “something being put 
into the head or into human awareness,” which is not present outside; hence also 
the term “to imagine something” [Sicheinbilden, Vorgaukeln] for morbid imagi- 
nation, conjuring something up before one’s eyes {hopes, etc.), which cannot be re- 
alized, but is used as motive for inappropriate and wrong action. 

This little study is naturally deficient in style, because I made these notes when 
Thad no idea that I might ever wish to communicate its contents to other people. 


ee 
210 
eae 





Continuation of the above... 


under the window of my flat, etc. All this naturally only in my 
imagination, but in a manner that the rays get the impression 
that these objects and phenomena really exist. I can also “pic- 
ture” myself in a different place, for instance while playing the 
piano I see myself at the same time standing in front of a mir- 
ror in the adjoining room in female attire; when I am lying in 
bed at night I can give myself and the rays the impression that 
my body has female breasts and a female sexual organ; I men- 
tioned its great importance and the reason for it in Chapter 13. 
The picturing of female buttocks on my body—honi soit qui 
mal y pense—has become such a habit that I do it almost auto- 
matically whenever I bend down. “Picturing” in this sense 
may therefore be called a reversed miracle. In the same way as 
rays throw on to my nerves pictures they would like to see es- 
pecially in dreams, I too can in turn produce pictures for the 
rays which I want them to see. 

He who has not experienced what I have cannot form any 
idea in how many ways the ability to “picture” has become of 
value to me. It has truly often been a consolation and comfort 
in the unending monotony of my dreary life, in the mental tor- 
tures I suffered from the nonsensical twaddle of voices. What 
great joy to be able to picture again in my mind's eye recollec- 
tions of journeys and landscapes, sometimes—when the rays 
behave favorably—with such surprising faithfulness and true 
color that both myself and the rays have almost the exact im- 
pression of the landscapes I want to see again as if they were 
actually there. 

While writing these lines, I am attempting—by way of ex- 
periment—to make the shape of the Matterhorn appear on the 
horizon—at the point near Dittersbach from where the sum- 
mit rises so beautifully—and can convince myself that I suc- 
ceed up to a point with my eyes closed or open. Similarly I 
have innumerable times in the course of years seen shapes of 
people I knew enter my room or walk about in the garden, 


Igepal 
211 
a) 





MEMOIRS 


“pictured” them whenever I wanted to see them; or I gave shape 
to cartoons, which I had seen somewhere, particularly humor- 
ous ones from the Fliegenden Blatter, etc. In sleepless nights I 
often took revenge as it were for the rays’ play-with-miracles, 
by conjuring up myself all sorts of shapes, serious or humor- 
ous, sensuously exciting or fearful, in my bedroom or in the 
cell; the entertainment I obtained in this way was an essential 
means to conquer the otherwise often unbearable boredom. I 
often accompany my piano-playing with the relevant “pictur- 
ing” particularly when I play piano arrangements. I can produce 
a whole opera or parts of it by “picturing” in my mind's eye 
the whole course of the action, the characters, the scenery, etc. 
—sometimes with surprising vividness. As I mostly have deal- 
ings with miracled birds, I sometimes enjoy myself by jokingly 
“picturing” for them how they would appear when being eaten 
up by a cat, etc. Naturally “picturing” in this sense requires 
considerable mental exertion, and my head must be in fairly 
good order and 1 in good spirits; when these conditions prevail 
Ican derive quite considerable pleasure if the intended pictures 
succeed fairly accurately. Apart from mere entertainment, “pic- 
turing” has another significance hardly less important. Seeing 
pictures purifies rays, as already mentioned in Chapter 11, 
they then enter into me without their usual destructive force. 
For this reason attempts are regularly made by counter- 
miracles to blot out what I have “pictured”; but I am usually 
victorious, and the pictures remain visible to me and the rays 
for as long as I exert my will, although admittedly they fre- 
quently become less distinct or paler. I have also to “picture” 
when I want to play the piano accurately, because miracles be- 
come less disturbing when I thus gain the goodwill of the rays. 





99. For instance I make—in day-time or at night—Napoleon or Frederick the 
Great walk through my room, or the Emperor William I emerge from my wardrobe 


in full regalia, etc., etc. 


a) a) 
212 
eat et) 





Continuation of the above... 


Finally a not unimportant accompaniment of compulsive 
thinking is that all noises I hear, particularly those lasting 
some time (the rattling of railway trains, the rumbling of 
chain-steamers, the music of concerts, etc.), seem to speak the 
words which are talked into my head by the voices, and also 
those words in which I formulate my own thoughts. 

In contrast to the language of the sun and of the miracu- 
lously created birds this is only a subjective feeling: the sound 
of spoken or developing words is communicated to the audi- 
tory impressions which I simultaneously receive from rail- 
ways, chain-steamers, squeaking boots, etc.; it is far from me 
to assert that railways, chain-steamers, etc., really talk like 
the sun and the birds. This particularly disturbed the rays be- 
cause (as mentioned in Chapter 7, p. 90) in their previous 
abode in distant celestial regions, they were accustomed to the 
most holy peace; all noises must therefore frighten them. 
Hence such continually used phrases as “If only the cursed 
railways would cease to speak,” “If only the cursed chain- 
steamers would cease to speak,” etc. Such sentences of course 
made no practical difference whatever. Indeed the idea that 
one could stop a nuisance by simply expressing in words the 
wish for it to stop, seems to have been one of the peculiarities 
of the soul-character. For example: when miracles make my 
face hot or my feet cold, I am continually urged to say aloud: 
"If only the cursed heat would cease” or “If only my feet 
weren't so cold”; whereas as a practical human being I natu- 
rally prefer to wash my face with cold water instead or to 
warm my feet by rubbing them. Whether this peculiarity of 
the soul-character is a weakness must be answered guardedly: 
in the Order of the World souls existed only for enjoyment, 
not for practical action like human beings and other creatures 
of the earth. I am of course indifferent to the talking of rail- 
ways and other noises; but these gained importance because 
they became a weapon in my hand against the falsification of 


eet 


uw 





MEMOIRS 


my thoughts by the rays. By will power! can keep out, if only 
temporarily, all vibrations from outside. Thus “I am master of 
all noises” as the expression goes, which enables me to force 
certain forms of the not-thinking-of-anything-thought on to 
the rays while trains and chain-steamers pass, and so achieve 
temporary peace for my nerves. 





God and the processes of 
creation; spontaneous 
generation; insects 
created by miracles. 
“Direction of gaze.” 


System-of-examination 


16 


ALTHOUGH IN THE preceding chapters I have reported a 
good deal about divine miracles, it was all about damaging ef- 
fects on my body and the interferences they created in every- 
thing I did. Obviously these are signs of an abnormal state of 
affairs, which arose because the Order of the World itself was 
out of joint. To fight an individual human being and to work 
destruction on his body is not the rays’ task, their essential 
purpose is to create. This essential function of rays, of God’s 
miraculous creative power is still evident in many ways; I will 
therefore proceed to expound my opinions on the basis of ob- 
servations I made. I am aware that this is the most difficult 
subject ever to exercise the human mind, andI must anticipate 
that I can only make a few incomplete observations more in 
the nature of aphorisms. The essential secret of creation re- 
mains a closed book even for me; I have only an inkling which 
I will try to set out. 

As mentioned earlier (Chapter 1, footnote 11) I believe that 
the essence of divine creation consists in a partial self-sacrifice 


peel 
215 
eee) 





MEMOIRS 


of rays which are sent down with the conscious will to create 
something in the outer world. God wills that something should 
be, and by dispatching rays with this will, what He wills im- 
mediately comes into existence. The Bible expresses this sig- 
nificantly in the words “God said, Let there be light: and there 
was light”; but to understand this fully is beyond human ca- 
pacity. Yet divine creative power seems to be not altogether 
boundless; it is somehow dependent on certain conditions con- 
nected mainly with the spatial relations to the celestial body 
on which creation was to take place, and therefore seems con- 
nected with drawing nearer to that body. 

In order to create a complete human being—an act of cre- 
ation which one must assume actually took place in the dim 
past—an extraordinary exertion of power was necessary, an 
exceptional approach to this celestial body; as a permanent 
state of affairs this was probably incompatible with the needs 
of the rest of the universe, perhaps even incompatible with the 
very existence of God Himself. 

What applies to man naturally applies also to all higher ani- 
mal life which was to be created next to already existing lower 
forms of animal life. One might therefore assume that all cre- 
ation on any one celestial body did not come into existence 
as Darwin postulated by new species developing through grad- 
ual evolution from earlier forms, but in a series of single acts 
of creation by which new species were each time created as 
models for other species, although possibly with some recol- 
lection of their earlier forms. Each species was perhaps only 
created in one or a few specimens endowed from the start with 
the capacity for reproduction; they could therefore in favorable 
conditions multiply to any number. Naturally, when a new 
species was created conditions had to exist which allowed that 
species to survive permanently; the physical conditions on the 
celestial body (temperature, air, water, etc.) must have reached 
a certain development and a population of plants and lower 





God and the processes of creation... 


animal forms had to be in existence to serve the higher species 
as nourishment. The crowning glory of the whole of creation, 
however, was the human being; the plan of creation was to 
form him in the image of God, as a being who after death is 
transformed again into God (compare Chapter 1, footnote 11). 

It is impossible for me to give a detailed scientific account 
of the cosmogenic theory which I have sketched roughly above 
as I lack almost all means to do so. I have no access to scien- 
tific sources; most of the time I lack the necessary conditions 
of health, because while I work my head is the continual 
object of distracting and damaging miracles which make con- 
centration impossible; lastly it would probably need a better 
intellect than mine to solve the gigantic task of proving the 
above conception scientifically. 

I will therefore confine myself to recounting the observa- 
tions which led me to this conception. My aim is to show the 
reader that he is not only dealing with the empty figments of a 
poor mental patient’s fantasy—I am still considered as such 
among human beings—but with results which are the fruit of 
many years’ hard thinking and based on experiences of a very 
special kind not known to other human beings. These may not 
contain the complete truth in all its aspects, but will be in- 
comparably nearer the truth than all that has been thought and 
written about the subject in the course of thousands of years. 

My most important observation is, that for years I have ex- 
perienced direct genesis (creation) through divine miracles cer- 
tainly on lower animals and I still experience it around me 
hourly. I have thus gained the certain conviction that sponta- 
neous generation (parentless generation, generatio aequivoca} 
does in fact exist; not, however, in the materialistic sense 
which in natural science is connected with these terms, in 
that inorganic substances can combine by chance with one an- 
other in such a manner that an organized (living} being results; 
here it is used in the totally different sense that the coming 


Geveal 
27. 
[eet 


MEMOIRS 


into existence of such life is due to the purposeful manifesta- 
tions of divine power of will or divine power of creation. The 
animals thus created belong to different species according to 
the time of day or season; apart from spiders, the commonest 
are insects of all sorts, particularly flies, gnats, wasps, bees, 
bumble-bees, ants, earwigs, butterflies, night-moths, moths, 
etc., etc. These animals always appear on definite occasions 
and in definite order around me; they appear so frequently that 
there is no doubt of their being each time newly created; they 
cannot possibly have existed before and only been driven into 
my company accidentally. For instance I can expect without 
fail, in fact I can predict, that as soon as I sit down on a bench 
in the garden and miracles close my eyes, which would in a 
short time lead to sleep through a union of all rays, a fly, wasp 
or bumble-bee or a whole swarm of gnats appears to prevent 
me from sleeping. These miracles are mostly started by the 
lower God (Ariman); but I have the impression that these rela- 
tively harmless miracles have lately also been practiced by the 
upper God (Ormuzd}; the reason, as mentioned earlier, is that 
even his hostile attitude towards me has greatly decreased 
since the steady increase of soul-voluptuousness. 

I have most stringent and convincing proofs of the fact that 
these beings do not fly towards me by accident, but are beings 
newly created for my sake each time. I am aware that it is diffi- 
cult to convince other people equally: but this is not my main 
purpose. At present I have not the slightest intention of making 
propaganda for my belief in miracles, nor for my ideas about di- 
vine matters; I am satisfied to relate my experiences and obser- 
vations in the certain hope that the overall picture of the 
miraculous phenomena which can be observed on my person 
and which probably will become more and more marked in 
the future, will lead other human beings of necessity to recog- 
nize their truth—even if only in years to come. One will prob- 
ably object that there is nothing very extraordinary in flies being 


awa 
218 
Doers 





God and the processes of creation... 


about the room or wasps about in the open at certain times, etc., 
andthat only my morbid imagination makes me believe they are 
divine miracles somehow related to my own person. I will there- 
fore proceed to give some of the more important items which 
led me to the opposite opinion. As often as an insect of the 
mentioned species appears, a miracle simultaneously affects 
the direction of my gaze; I have not mentioned this miracle be- 
fore but it has been regularly practiced for years. Rays after all 
continually want to see what pleases them, and these are fore- 
most either female beings, through which their sensation of 
voluptuousness is stimulated, or their own miracles, which 
give them the joy of having created something (compare what 
has been said about this in Chapter 1}. My eye-muscles are there- 
fore influenced to move in a certain direction so that my glance 
must fall on things just created (or else on a female being). 

The objective reality of this event cannot be doubted after 
thousandfold repetition; why should I have the slightest wish 
to pay particular attention to any fly, wasp or butterfly, etc., 
which happens to appear around me. One will in any case not 
dispute that I must know myself whether my eyes are pulled 
towards an indifferent object or whether I look at something 
interesting around me of my own will.'~ Added to this the 
voices that talk to me always make these phenomena the topic 
of a special conversation. This happens in two ways: either 


100. Miracles directing my gaze are practiced—as mentioned in the text—on other 
occasions as well; lately since the rays’ attitude towards me has generally become 
more friendly it is even done solely for my benefit. For instance I notice almost 
daily that when I look for a book amongst my books or for certain scores or if Iam 
searching for a small object (a needle or small pair of scissors, etc.), which I do not 
notice momentarily because it is so small, miracles direct my gaze (turn my eyes] 
to the desired object. This phenomenon, the reality of which cannot be doubted, is 
in my opinion of absolutely fundamental importance for the knowledge of divine 
qualities and forces. Two conclusions can be drawn from it: firstly that the rays 


(and I know this from many other reasons too} are able to read my thoughts (how 


e2 
219 
a 


MEMOIRS 


one falsely imputes fears or wishes to my nerves, for instance, 
if only the cursed flies or wasps, etc., would stop, or one uses 
such an occasion for examining me. This is because God (as 
mentioned in Chapter 13) cannot free Himself from the notion 
that the moment the not-thinking-of-anything occurs, that is 
if no ideas formulated in words emerge from my nerves, I am 
in a state of complete stupidity (“dementia”); but He always 
wishes to make quite certain whether this is so, and with it 
whether the hoped-for moment has really arrived in which a fi- 
nal withdrawal of rays is possible. 

The way this examination takes place is very peculiar and 
hardly understandable for anybody who knows human nature. 
People around me are made to say certain words by stimulat- 
ing their nerves; for instance madmen throw in a certain learned 
term (possibly in a foreign language} which they perhaps re- 
member from the past; these come to my ears and simultane- 
ously the words “has been recorded” (scilicet into awareness 
or comprehension) are spoken into my nerves: for example a 
madman says without any connection “rationalism” or “social 
democracy” and the voices say “has been recorded,” thereby 
attempting to find out whether the terms “rationalism” and 
“social democracy” still have a meaning for me, in other words 
whether I have enough reason left to comprehend these words. 

It is so obstinately held that I have become stupid to such a 
degree that day after day one doubts whether I still recognize 
people around me, whether I still understand ordinary natural 
phenomena, or articles of daily use or objects of art, indeed even 





could they otherwise know what I am looking for at the moment}; secondly that 
they must be aware of where the looked-for object is; in other words the place 
where such an object is is seen by God with the help of sunlight with much 
greater certainty and perfection than by human beings with their eyes. By the way 
full daylight is not necessary; even the dim light of night is sufficient; even when 
it is half or completely dark I am often enabled to put my hand on objects by my 
gaze being directed to them. 


FS acl 
220 
Bere! 





God and the processes of creation... 


whether I still know who I am or have been. The phrase “has 
been recorded” with which I was examined, follows when my 
gaze has been directed towards certain things and I have seen 
them; they are then registered on my nerves with this phrase. 
For example when I saw the doctor my nerves immediately re- 
sounded with “has been recorded,” or “the senior attendant— 
has been recorded,” or, “a joint of pork—has been recorded,” 
“railway—has been recorded” and especially the phrase " Senats- 
prdsident—has been recorded,” etc. And all this goes on in end- 
less repetition day after day, hour after hour. Incredibile scriptu 
I would like to add, and yet everything is really true, however 
difficult it must be for other people to reconcile themselves to 
the idea that God is totally incapable of judging a living human 
being correctly; even I myself became accustomed to this idea 
only gradually after innumerable observations. 

The system of examining me is similarly practiced in the case 
of the miraculously created insects. For instance, at the pres- 
ent season (early September} there are many butterflies about 
when I walk in the garden. Whenever a butterfly appears my 
gaze is first directed to it as to a being newly created that very 
moment, and secondly the word “butterfly—has been recorded” 
is spoken into my nerves by the voices; this shows that one 
thought I could possibly no longer recognize a butterfly and 
one therefore examines me to find out whether I still know the 
meaning of the word “butterfly.” 

These observations will give the most sober reader the im- 
pression that remarkable things happen to me. One might of 
course doubt whether I can or will speak the truth, in other 
words whether I exaggerate or suffer from self-deception. But I 
may say—whatever one may think of my mental faculties— 
that I can claim two qualities for myself without reservation, 
namely absolute truthfulness and more than usually keen 
powers of observation; no one who knew me in my days of 
health or witnessed my behavior now would dispute this. 


MEMOIRS 


With respect to the miraculously created lower animals (in- 
sects, etc.) I have already mentioned that there were certain 
differences according to season and time of day. 

Not even God Himself can create whatever He likes at all 
times. The measure of His creative power is dependent— 
according to season and time of day-—on the relation which ex- 
ists between the sun and the earth; it seems to me that it is 
also dependent on the momentary condition of the weather. 
One must remember that, according to the ideas I discussed 
earlier (Chapter 1 and Chapter 7, footnote 44) the sun is not re- 
ally a power in itself and separate from God—in a certain sense 
she is even to be identified with God: in other words she is the 
instrument nearest to earth of God’s power of miracles. God 
can only create within the spatial relations which He 
established between Himself and any celestial body and the 
resulting conditions of light and warmth. That is why butter- 
flies appear only in day-time, wasps, bees and bumble-bees 
mostly on warm days; night-moths, gnats and moths in the 
evening when the glow of lamps also attracts them. 

Whether the same applies to (talking) birds which are cre- 
ated by miracle, and which I mentioned in Chapter 15, is ex- 
tremely difficult to say.'® I have already mentioned in Chapter 
15 that the talking birds belong to whatever species of birds 
can be expected at a particular season. But there is one essen- 
tial difference: the talking birds contain remnants of previous 
human souls, but not so the insects created by miracle. The 
noise of the voices which speak into my head fuses with the 
noise of wasps or flies buzzing around me so that they appear 
to speak. This is certainly only a subjective feeling of the kind 
mentioned at the end of Chapter 17 in connection with the 
noises of trains, chain-steamers, etc. But I must mention an- 
other interesting detail about the miraculously created insects 





100B. Compare footnote 93B, page 196. 


Oral dl 
222 
Ee 





God and the processes of creation... 


which confirms that they are actually newly created beings: 
whether they are of a more or less molesting kind is directly 
dependent on whether God's attitude to me is friendly or not. 
God’s attitude towards me in turn is dependent, as I have 
shown before, on the degree of soul-voluptuousness present in 
me at the time and on the distance to which He has with- 
drawn; the farther He is removed and the smaller the degree of 
soul-voluptuousness, the more unfriendly His behavior to- 
wards me. The periods of friendly and unfriendly attitudes al- 
ternate rapidly in a single day. When God was unfriendly 
towards me earwigs, spiders, etc., appeared at night, and in 
day-time wasps, bumble-bees, etc.; in other words nasty or mo- 
lesting animals which can even—by biting—cause pain; flies, 
moths, butterflies, etc., which caused me no unpleasantness 
whatsoever, appeared when God was friendly. 

In this connection I must finally mention the so-called 
frightening-miracle; this presumably was also a manifestation 
of God’s miraculous creative power. The term frightening- 
miracle is not my own but originates from the voices; it indi- 
cates the originally intended effect of these miracles; they have 
been practiced near me in many forms for years. 

In early years there sometimes appeared when I was in 
bed—not sleeping but awake—all sorts of large, queer, almost 
dragon-like shapes, immediately next to my bed, and almost as 
big as my bed; they were so close that I could almost have 
touched them with my hands. The “black bears” and the 
“white bears” mentioned in Chapter 6, which I saw repeatedly 
in Flechsig’s Asylum, belonged probably to the same category 
of “frightening-miracle.” Frightening-miracles have for years 
appeared quite suddenly very near me in the shape of dark 
shadows in day-time or at night when I am on the corridor, 
play the piano, etc. They still occur almost daily; at times 
they assume a human shape. I can even provoke the frighten- 
ing-miracle or something very like it: if I put my hand in front 


MEMOIRS 


of a white surface, perhaps the white-painted door of my room 
or the white glazing of the stove, I can see very peculiar distor- 
tions of shadows obviously caused by certain changes in the 
light rays of the sun. I am quite certain that these phenomena 
are not only my subjective sensations (“hallucinations” in 
the sense of Kraepelin’s PSYCHIATRY, p. 110), as with every 
frightening-miracle my attention is particularly drawn to it 
by directing my gaze (turning my eyes). This happens particu- 
larly when I play the piano: left to my own free will my 
thoughts would certainly rest on the score in front of me or 
on the feelings aroused by the beauty of the music. But my 
eyes are turned quite suddenly so that my gaze is directed 
to a shadow created on the door or somewhere near me. I 
presume—naturally one can go no further than to presume— 
that the “frightening-miracles” are perhaps to be regarded as 
the very first beginnings of divine creation, which in certain 
circumstances could be further condensed to “fleeting-impro- 
vised-men” and from there lead up to the creation of real hu- 
man beings or other permanent beings. They of course lost 
their frightening effect on me as I grew accustomed to them 
with the years; nowadays they are only a nuisance when they 
suddenly divert my attention from what really interests me. 

In the next chapter I will discuss certain other aspects of 
God's nature and the essence of divine creation. 





Continuation of the above. 
God's omnipotence and 
man’s freedom of will 


19 


IN THE PREVIOUS chapter I expressed my opinion that 
spontaneous generation (parentless generation) does actually 
occur; as proof I adduced my observations on the miraculously 
created insects. But I have to make some reservation to guard 
against misunderstanding. I can perhaps best express this 
reservation as follows: spontaneous generation occurs againon 
our earth since conditions contrary to the Order of the World 
have arisen; probably spontaneous generation has not occurred 
on our earth for thousands of years. “Spontaneous generation” 
is basically nothing other than a literal term for what I have 
called—in accordance with the language of the Bible and other 
religious sources—creation through divine miracles. 

The fundamental view I gained about God's relation to His 
creation is this: God exercised His power of miracles on our 
earth—as probably on any other celestial body which had 
reached the same degree of development—only until the ulti- 
mate aim of His creation was attained with the creation of the 
human being. From then on He left the created organic world 





MEMOIRS 


as it were to itself, and interfered directly by miracle only very 
rarely, if at all, in very exceptional cases (compare Chapter 1). 
In general He diverted His activity to other celestial bodies and 
to drawing up to Blessedness the souls of departed human be- 
ings; He Himself retired to an enormous distance.’ 

I cannot be expected to furnish scientific proof of this fun- 
damental idea; I do not intend writing a scientific treatise on 
the history of the evolution of the universe. I only wish to re- 
late what I have experienced and learned, and draw a few legit- 
imate conclusions in the light of this knowledge. I expect 
confirmation of my fundamental idea mainly from my own 
personal fate and fortune as they will develop in the future; the 
time will come when other human beings will also have to 
recognize as a fact that my person has become the center of di- 
vine miracles. I would then have to leave to other people to 
elaborate scientifically the conclusions I have hinted at and 
perhaps to correct some details. I will now return to my theme. 

I assume that the whole work of creation on a celestial body 
consisted in a succession of single acts of creation, in general 
advancing from lower to higher forms of organic life. This idea 
is of course not new, indeed is common knowledge among 
those who have lately occupied themselves with the history 
of evolution. The point at issue is only whether to believe in 





101. I believe I can remember having read somewhere sometime in one of the 
sources of our religion the sentence: “The Lord—scilicet when the work of His 
creation was finished—went away”; this sentence seems to be a figurative expres- 
sion of what I wanted to convey. For a long time I assumed that this sentence was 
contained somewhere in the Bible; but having succeeded in getting a copy of the 
Bible, I found it was not there, in any case not in the report of the Creation in 
Genesis where I looked for it. Whether it is perhaps somewhere else in the Bible 
would have to be answered by theologians. I believe that this formulation of the 
idea did not originate in my own head. Should it therefore not be contained in our 
religious sources, I would have to assume that I received this sentence from the 
voices on some occasion which I have forgotten. 





Continuation of the above... 


blind accident as the cause of evolutionary development, which 
in some odd way leads to more perfect forms, or whether one 
must acknowledge an “intelligent cause” (God) working with 
a conscious will towards the development of higher and higher 
forms. That the development is goal-directed (du Prel) must 
be granted even by scientists otherwise inclined to attribute 
the “tenacity of deistic notions” to the lack of intellect of the 
majority of people. All that is recorded in my book has led 
me to the certain knowledge of the existence of a living God. 
This entitles me to examine the relation between God and His 
created world from a totally new point of view in the light of 
the supernatural impressions I received. 

As already mentioned in Chapter 1, I know as little as other 
human beings whether the celestial bodies themselves (fixed 
stars, planets, etc.) were also created by God; I must therefore 
leave open whether the “Nebular Hypothesis” of Kant-Laplace 
is correct. With regard to the organic world it seems to me that 
one must make a fundamental distinction between the mode 
of creation of the plant world and of the animal world. One can 
of course assume that minimal parts of God's nerves (rays} were 
transformed through the act of creation into the shape of ani- 
mal souls which, however low, would still have the one 
quality of self-awareness in common with divine rays. But it is 
incomprehensible, at least for human beings, that divine rays 
could enter into plants which, even if considered in a way as 
living, yet lack all self-awareness. One might assume that the 
plant world could have been created in certain favorable condi- 
tions by the mere reflection of rays which fall on to the earth 
with sunlight; perhaps God came nearer the earth while creat- 
ing an organized animal world, say on Venus. This might at the 
same time have resulted in calling a plant world to life on the 
earth, which was then less developed. But I must confess that 
I have received no divine intimation about this; if therefore I 
were to continue this discussion I might lose myself in fruitless 


(een 
227 
> et 


MEMOIRS 


speculations in which any student of natural science might 
prove me wrong. I am on much safer ground when I assert that 
the capacity to transform themselves into animals of all kinds, 
ultimately even into a human being, is the latent potential of 
divine rays; they can create these creatures out of themselves. 

In this respect I command the most extraordinary experi- 
ences and observations. Above all I want to mention that the 
rays (nerves) of the upper God, when they are thrust down in 
consequence of my nerves’ power of attraction, often appear in 
my head in the image of a human shape. I am by coincidence 
in the fortunate position to be able to point to a really existing 
picture instead of having to describe these things in words; this 
picture is surprisingly like the picture I often see in my head. It 
is the painting “Liebesreigen” by Pradilla contained in the 5th 
volume of MODERN ART (Berlin, published by Richard Bong]; in 
the left hand upper corner of this picture a woman is seen, de- 
scending with arms stretched before her and folded hands. One 
has only to translate her into a male person to get a fairly accu- 
rate picture of what appears in my head when the nerves of the 
upper God come down. Head, chest and arms were distinct; 
the arms swung to one side, almost as if these nerves were try- 
ing to overcome an obstacle to their descent—the nerves of 
Flechsig’s soul crowding the heavenly vault—see Chapter 8. 
The rays of the lower God (Ariman) also quite frequently cre- 
ate in my head the picture of a human face which (as soon as 
soul-voluptuousness is present) starts to smack its tongue, like 
human beings when eating something they like, or in other 
words, if they have the impression of sensual enjoyment. 

I must return here once again to the “little men” mentioned 
earlier (Chapters 6 and 11). I often observed that in certain con- 
ditions souls (rays) appeared as diminutive human shapes in my 
head or somewhere on my body; one must assume therefore that 
the capacity to be transformed into human shape or to become a 
human being, is an innate potentiality of divine rays. An entirely 


(eal 
228 
as) 





Continuation of the above... 


new light is thus shed on the well-known word of the Bible: “He 
created man in His image and in the image of God created He 
him.” It appears that this passage from the Bible has to be under- 
stood literally, which no human being has so far dared to do. 

Presumably man was the highest God could create. All 
other created beings form only a long preparatory series with 
which God aimed at His ultimate goal: the creation of the hu- 
man being. It would of course have been absurd to create hu- 
man beings only, because human beings depend for their 
maintenance on many lower animal forms which serve as 
nourishment or for other purposes. The capacity to create the 
highest form, the human being, of necessity included the ca- 
pacity to create lower animal forms. Man could only be cre- 
ated when the soil was prepared for him. In the long series of 
animal forms created before him one can discern more and 
more the approximation to the structure of the human being. 

When God had created each single species His work of cre- 
ation with respect to that species had ended; when He created 
the human being the whole work of creation was accom- 
plished. Every single species was able to preserve itself by be- 
ing provided with the conditions under which it could live, by 
the capacity to reproduce and by the continued warmth of the 
sun. To what extent the various species and their individual 
members succeeded was dependent on their power of resist- 
ance and their individual abilities, but was no longer subject to 
direct intervention by God. 

I will add here a few remarks to those made previously 
(Chapter 13, footnote 81) about the relationship of God's 
omnipotence and omniscience to human freedom of will.!® 


103. Intimation about God’s relation to human freedom of will from the outset 
played an important role in one of the first visions I ever had {about the beginning 
of March 1894); as far as I can remember, in the very first vision in which God, 


if I may express it so revealed Himself to me. Unfortunately I can no longer 


feel 
229 
(ee 


MEMOIRS 


Mankind has always been occupied with the question whether 
God knows the future, and if He does, how this can be recon- 
ciled with the undoubted freedom of the human will. For a cor- 
rect perspective one has to remember that for God in a sense 
there is neither past nor future; for Himself God has nothing to 
expect by way of fate or fortune from the future; He is at all 
times the same; this is implied in the notion of eternity. But 
put in a different way, the question whether God knows the fu- 
ture of the beings He has created—both species and individu- 
als—can best be answered with a few examples. I therefore 
raise the question: does divine omniscience exist with respect 
to the future in the sense that God knows in advance: 


(1) To what age every single individual of the millions of 
living human beings will live? 

(2) Whether and which flies will be caught by a spider in its 
web within a certain space of time? 

(3) Which of the hundreds of thousands of numbers in a lot- 
tery will be the winner? 

(4) What the terms will be of a possible peace to be con- 
cluded in the present war between Japan and the major Euro- 
pean powers against China? 


These examples, I believe, illustrate exactly the way in 
which for centuries scholastic philosophy of the Middle Ages 
treated predestination and related questions. Really one has 
only to raise these hypothetical questions to recognize that it 
would be absurd to answer them in the affirmative. All the ex- 
amples concern matters of the highest interest for an individ- 





remember details as it was long ago and I have since had so many other visions. 
But I do remember that I told Professor Flechsig on the following morning some- 
thing about the content of this vision and that I had a conversation with him on 
this topic. 





Continuation of the above... 


ual or a nation, even vital questions; yet for God they are all of 
them equally insignificant. God has provided for all the species 
He created (indirectly therefore also for the individuals belong- 
ing to them) the necessary conditions for self-preservation; it is 
left to these beings themselves whether they make good use of 
them and succeed; God therefore cannot possibly know in ad- 
vance. This of course does not exclude that God bestowed a 
special interest on the higher forms of life He had created, par- 
ticularly on the preservation of the human race as a whole, or 
single human individuals. He could thus, in suitable cases and 
very exceptionally, even subsequently intervene directly by 
miracle. 

Everything I have said so far in this chapter refers to condi- 
tions in consonance with the Order of the World. But through 
my case fundamental changes have come about in these condi- 
tions, the significance of which not even I can fully assess. As 
God was forced to draw nearer the earth again and remain per- 
manently relatively close to it—perhaps neglecting at the same 
time other celestial bodies and certainly thereby suspending 
the founding of new states of Blessedness—the earth has once 
again become the permanent scene of divine miracles. It seems 
impossible for rays to remain in a state of absolute inactivity; 





104. But Ihave to add that with respect to example (3), theoretically God could, if 
He wished, determine the number which is to win in the lottery. As in similar 
miracles I experienced on myself and saw in my environment, it would not be im- 
possible to direct the gaze of the person (an orphan) drawing the ticket from the 
urn or even his muscles directly to the number God wishes drawn. God can, if He 
wishes, acquire the knowledge where the various numbers lie in the urn. I con- 
clude this from events mentioned in footnote 100, i.e. that God apparently knew 
where a little object was actually lying which I needed and could not immediately 
see. But of course such a lottery-miracle (if I may use this expression for short] 
will never be practiced, because there can be no motive for God using His power 
of miracles simply to help an individual without particular merit to a stroke of 
luck. In other words God in this and other cases does not know the future, but 
could always get to know it if there were a sufficiently strong motive for Him. 


MEMOIRS 


to create (to produce by miracle) is after all their nature. As for 
the time being in any case, they could not possibly fulfill the 
tasks which were theirs within the Order of the World, the 
power of miracles was diverted, indeed became a purposeless 
demonstration of power achieving nothing. 

Miracles are directed in the first place against my person 
and against all objects I use; miracles affect the behavior of all 
human beings around me, rays influence their nerves to speak, 
to cough, to sneeze, even to pass wind and to relieve them- 
selves, etc., and all other natural functions; miracles also affect 
all living animals around me; even the neighing of horses, the 
barking of dogs, etc., is produced by influencing their nerves. 
Finally miracles are used to create anew lower animals (in- 
sects, etc., as mentioned in the last chapter); all to no purpose 
whatsoever, as living animals and human beings can do these 
things anyhow, and the newly created insects belong to a 
species which in any case already exists in vast numbers, so 
that there is no need to call them into life afresh. 

The enactment of miracles therefore amounts as far as they 
concern me to a useless torment, as far as they concern other 
people and animals to a senseless game. Even for God Himself 
this situation is—as stated before—fraught with certain evils. 
His joy over newly created things can last only a short time 
and soon gives way to states of anxiety; this is evident from 
the nerves, separated from the totality of God’s nerves by my 
power of attraction, coming down to me with cries of “help.” 
Whether and how it will be possible to bring these conditions, 
so unpleasant for all parties, back again into their normal 
channels and into consonance with the Order of the World, I 
can only speculate about; but I will add a few more relevant 
considerations at the end of the book. 





Egocentricity of the rays 
regarding my person. 
Further developments of 
personal affairs 


aU 


| WISH TO add another point in connection with God’s 
inability to understand the living human being as an organism 
and to judge his thinking correctly, which has in many ways 
become important to me. I can put this point briefly: every- 
thing that happens is in reference to me. Writing this sen- 
tence, I am fully aware that other people may be tempted to 
think that I am pathologically conceited; I know very well that 
this very tendency to relate everything to oneself, to bring 
everything that happens into connection with one’s own per- 
son, is a common phenomenon among mental patients. But 
in my case the very reverse obtains. Since God entered into 
nerve-contact with me exclusively, I became in a way for God 
the only human being, or simply the human being around 
whom everything turns, to whom everything that happens 
must be related and who therefore, from his own point of view, 
must also relate all things to himself. 

This completely absurd conception, which was at first 
naturally incomprehensible to me but which I was forced to 


MEMOIRS 


acknowledge as a fact through years of experience, becomes ap- 
parent at every opportunity and occasion. For instance, when I 
read a book or a newspaper, one thinks that the ideas in them are 
my own; when I play a song or an opera arrangement for the pi- 
ano, one thinks that the text of the song or opera expresses my 
own feelings. It is the same naive ignorance which is found 
among uneducated people who visit the theater, namely the idea 
that what the actors speak actually renders their own feelings 
or indeed that the actors themselves are the persons acted. Of 
course it is only amusing when, for instance, while I am play- 
ing the aria from “The Magic Flute” “Oh I feel it, it has van- 
ished, gone for ever, love’s delight,” or “The vengeance of hell 
boils in my heart, death and despair flame around me,” I hear 
voices in my head which presume that from now on I have re- 
ally lost all happiness for ever, or that I am actually in the grip 
of despair, etc. One must not underestimate how my patience 
has been tried for years through having to listen to the most 
terrible rubbish which consists of throwing in questions: 
“Why don’t you say it (aloud)?” and “Has been recorded.” It is 
so nonsensical, that for a long time I was in doubt whether 
God Himself could be responsible, or whether it was attributa- 
ble to some lower soul-less creatures created on distant planets 
in the fashion of the “fleeting-improvised-men,” thence to be 
employed for the writing-down and the questioning business. 

I have often discussed the reasons for and against this idea 
in my “Little Studies,” where anybody interested can read de- 
tails. I am inclined to believe, without finally committing 
myself, that it is the distant God Himself who causes the non- 
sensical questioning business, and that He is ruled by the same 
error which underlies it.'°> This ignorance of human nature and 
of the human mind is really no greater here than in the other 


105. Earlier (Chapter 9, pp. 124-126] I stated the contrary opinion. This is because 
these matters, by their very nature, make any absolutely final opinion 





Egocentricity of the rays... 


phenomena, in which I must assume that God Himself has a 
hand, e.g. in the matter of evacuation, to express myself briefly 
(see end of Chapter 16); in the assumption that to think noth- 
ing is identical with dementia, and in taking the nerve-language 
as the real language of human beings (Chapter 13), etc., etc. 

That God cannot claim infallibility since He entered into a 
relationship with me which is contrary to the Order of the 
World, is proved to my satisfaction, as He Himself must have 
determined the whole policy pursued against me, and thus 
have started the systems of writing-down, not-finishing-a- 
sentence, tying-to-celestial-bodies, etc. But this policy aims at 
the impossible. Yet for a full year I was concerned for my rea- 
son, being then still totally ignorant of the effects of the mira- 
cles and the terrors they caused beyond all human experience. 
In the last five years, however, I have come to realize that the 
Order of the World does not provide even God with the means 
to destroy a human being’s reason. Nevertheless, even now God 
allows Himself to be led by the opposite policy, which amounts 
to possibly “forsaking me”; in pursuit of this policy He contin- 
ually starts new systems and gives me proof of it day after day. 
Even now He cannot rid Himself of these faulty notions. But I 
must emphasize again that I do not think that this is in any 
way irreconcilable with belief in God’s eternal wisdom in that 
sphere of action which is allotted to Him within the Order of 
the World. 

It is demanded of me to relate to myself everything that 
happens or is spoken by human beings, particularly during my 
regular walks in the garden of the Asylum. Hence my stay in 
the Asylum’s garden has always been very troublesome, and 
led in previous years to scenes of violence between myself and 
other patients. Soul-voluptuousness has for long been so strong 





impossible; hence I vacillate even now as new impressions seem to favor first one 


conception and then the other. 


tame at 
235 
4 


MEMOIRS 


in my body that a union of all rays can be expected at any mo- 
ment, and so the necessary conditions for sleep fulfilled; for 
years therefore I could not sit quietly on a bench for as long as 
two minutes, where I would have fallen asleep—particularly if 
tired after a more or less sleepless night—without the so-called 
“interferences” starting (compare Chapter 10), which enable 
the rays to withdraw. Sometimes these “interferences” are 
practiced in the harmless fashion of insects being produced by 
miracle (as described in Chapter 18); sometimes in other ways, 
by patients of the Asylum starting to talk to me or making 
some other noise near me. There can be no doubt that this is 
due to the nerves of the human being concerned being stimu- 
lated by miracles, because each time it happens (Chapter 7 and 
Chapter 15} I simultaneously feel a more or less painful blow 
on my head. 

Because the patients’ consist mostly of madmen of low edu- 
cation and rough humor, vulgar words are usually uttered, which 
the rays wanted me also to relate to myself. Sometimes they 
even caused me to be actually attacked, without any exchange 
of words, as for instance by a certain Dr. D. while I was quietly 
playing chess with another patient. I always tried, whenever 
possible, to ignore the insults hurled at me as coming from 
madmen. But ignoring these things has its limits; when the lu- 
natics come too close to me or continue their insulting behav- 
ior without paying any regard to the contempt I show them by 
my silence, nothing remains for me but to answer back in the 
same manner, if I want to avoid showing myself up as a cow- 
ard. But as on such occasions one word often leads to another, it 
used to end in actual scenes of violence in which, incidentally, 
I always had the satisfaction of knocking my attacker to the 
ground—despite violent miracles being simultaneously enacted 
against my knee-cap to make fighting impossible for me. 


106. All theirnames are of course also “written-down.” 


236 
(ia) 





Egocentricity of the rays... 


For some years I have luckily been able to avoid open 
blows, nevertheless even now every walk in the garden calls 
for a tremendous exertion of tact and moderation on my part if 
real scenes of scandal are to be avoided. For even now the 
method of setting the lunatics on me with insulting forms of 
speech continues, and at the same time the stupid twaddle 
of the voices “Has been recorded,” “Why don’t you say it 
(aloud?},” “Because I am stupid,” or even “Because I am 
afraid,” etc., tells me that it is still God’s purpose that I relate 
these insulting forms of speech to myself. 

For years therefore I made it my habit to take my chess- 
board into the garden on afternoon strolls and spend at least 
the greater part of the time playing chess, so as to maintain 
peace and order if possible and at the same time to offer God 
persistent proof that my reason was intact. I even carried this 
through for short periods during the winter in the most bitter 
cold, when I had to play chess standing up; while I play chess 
there is a certain amount of peace. I am exposed to the same 
nuisances even in my room, where the whole time—in the 
form of so-called “interferences”—other patients come in for 
no purpose; the connection of all this with supernatural mat- 
ters is beyond dispute. 

All these events together with other considerations made 
me decide about a year ago to work for my discharge from this 
Asylum within measurable time. I really belong among edu- 
cated people, not among madmen; as soon as I move among 
educated people, as for instance at the table of the Director of 
this Asylum, where I have taken meals since Easter 1900, 
many of the evils caused by miracles fade away, particularly 
the bouts of so-called bellowing, because during such times I 
have the opportunity by taking part in an open conversation to 
prove to God that my mental powers are undiminished. 
Although I have a nervous illness, I do not suffer in any way 
from a mental illness which would make me incapable of 


gel 
237 
fe) 


MEMOIRS 


looking after my own affairs (§ 6, B.-G.-B. for Germany) or 
which would allow my detention in an institution against my 
will on the grounds of administrative law.'” 

When I therefore learnt some years ago that I had been 
placed under temporary tutelage as early as 1895, I approached 
the authorities last autumn (1899) demanding a decision as to 
whether the temporary tutelage was to be made permanent or 
whether it could be rescinded. Contrary to my expectations, a 
formal order for my tutelage was made in March 1900 by the 
District Court Dresden, based on a medical expert’s report from 
this Asylum and a court hearing of January of that year. Because 
I considered the grounds for the decision unsubstantiated I 
brought an action in accordance with procedure against the 
Prosecuting Authority, to have my placing under tutelage re- 
scinded. The decision of the Court, the Country Court Dresden, 
is still outstanding, but can be expected in the course of this 
year. There is no need to give details of the case up to now, be- 
cause the files of the District and Country Court Dresden con- 
tain complete records, should wider circles become interested 
in my case. They also touch on my religious views. 

Almost imperceptibly the threads of this chapter have led 
me back from considerations about the nature of God to my 
own affairs. I want therefore to add a few more remarks about 
them. The circumstances of my outward life have lately changed 
markedly for the better, I would like to say have become 
more worthy of human dignity, particularly my treatment by 
the authorities of the Asylum; perhaps not least because my 
written works showed that after all in my case one may be 


107. I wrote an essay at the beginning of this year entitled “Under what circum- 
stances can mental patients be held in public institutions against their will?,” and 
tried to get it accepted for publication in a law journal. Unfortunately the editors 
of the journal refused it on the grounds of lack of space. In case the present work 
should ever be published I intend adding this essay in the form of an appendix. 


238 
ee eI 





Egocentricity of the rays... 


dealing with manifestations which lie outside the field of 
usual scientific experience. My bodily state is difficult to de- 
scribe; usually there is a very rapid change between high-grade 
bodily well-being and all sorts of more or less painful and dis- 
agreeable states. The feeling of bodily well-being rests upon 
soul-voluptuousness which is at times highly developed and 
so strong that especially when I am in bed, it requires only a 
little exertion of my imagination to attain such sensuous 
pleasure as gives a pretty definite foretaste of female sexual en- 
joyment in intercourse. 

I will come back to this point in greater detail in the 
next chapter. On the other hand as a result of the miracles 
practiced against me all manner of painful states occur alter- 
nately (namely whenever God withdraws again}, almost with- 
out exception quite suddenly and vanishing equally regularly 
after a short time. Besides the ones I have mentioned I also 
suffered from sciatica, cramp in the calves, states of paralysis, 
sudden attacks of hunger, and suchlike; earlier on lumbago 
and toothache were frequent. Sometimes the lumbago was 
so painful (while I was still sleeping in the padded room}, that 
I could only lift myself from the bed with simultaneous 
cries of pain—half voluntarily uttered; the toothache was 
also at times so severe that it made every mental activity 
impossible. Even now I suffer from almost uninterrupted 
headaches of a kind certainly unknown to other human 
beings, and hardly comparable to ordinary headaches. They 
are tearing and pulling pains and are caused by the attempt of 
rays, tied-to-celestial-bodies, to withdraw from me when soul- 
voluptuousness has become very strong. The bellowing- 
miracle usually occurs at the same time and causes, when it 
is often repeated, a very unpleasant concussion of the head; 
if it occurs while I am eating I must be very careful not to spit 
out what I have in my mouth. This rapid change in my condi- 
tion gives the overall impression of madness and my whole life 


MEMOIRS 


therefore carries this stamp, the more so as my surroundings 
are made up mostly of madmen who themselves add to all 
sorts of mad things happening. 

I can rarely remain long at any one occupation; headaches 
come on when I read for any time, write or do something simi- 
lar, and make a change of occupation necessary. I am therefore 
frequently forced to fill my time with trifles; I then feel physi- 
cally at my best (apart from playing the piano). I have had to 
keep myself busy in the past years with menial jobs, such as 
sticking things together, filling in pictures with paints, and 
suchlike; particularly helpful for my bodily well-being are 
those jobs which count as feminine occupations, for instance 
sewing, dusting, making beds, washing up, and so on. Even 
now there are days when apart from playing the piano I can oc- 
cupy myself only with such trifles, that is to say when the 
state of my head precludes a more fitting occupation requiring 
mental effort. My sleep is on the whole very much better than 
before; I have already mentioned that sometimes I cannot re- 
main in bed because of persistent states of bellowing (which al- 
ternate with high-grade sensuous pleasure). Even this year I 
have several times been forced to leave my bed from midnight 
or 1 a.m. onwards, and sit up until the morning by artificial 
lighting (which has now been provided), or in the height of 
summer without; in about a third of all nights this was neces- 
sary from 3 or 4 a.m. onwards. My sleep is often disturbed by 
dreams; from their tendentious content (“being retained on the 
side of men” in contrast to cultivating “feminine feelings”) I 
can frequently recognize the influence of the rays. But rarely 
do dreams now have the character of visions, i.e. the peculiar 
vividness of impressions. 

The talk of the voices I hear changes continually, it varied 
even during the short time while I was writing this book. Few 
of the previously used phrases are heard now, and hardly ever 
those referring to the “inot-thinking-of-anything-thought.” The 





Egocentricity of the rays.., 


talk of the voices has slowed down even more since my 
description of it in Chapter 16, so that it is almost nothing 
more than a hissing in my head; I could hardly distinguish 
individual words, if—I must say unfortunately—I did not al- 
ways know in advance from experience what senseless phrases 
to expect. 

I think it likely that changes of the kind described, which 
are all connected with increased soul-voluptuousness, will 
continue; and for the same reason the miracles enacted against 
me will in the future also change further. Most troublesome 
now are the states of bellowing—next to an occasional bad 
head—by which IJ have been visited for two or three years, and 
which have in the last year been an almost unbearable plague. 
Whether one can expect them to improve in the future I dare 
not prophesy; but if I could take up residence outside this 
Asylum I believe, for reasons given earlier, that these things 
would improve. 


Caxcount 
241 
a oe 


Blessedness and voluptuousness 
in their mutual relation. 
Consequences of this relation 
for personal behavior 


al 


SO FAR | have hardly attempted to adduce factual proof of 
the reality of the miracles which I assert happened, nor of the 
truth of my religious ideas. Quite apart from the frequently 
mentioned states of bellowing,'* a great deal of proof is pro- 
vided by the condition of my body, which on examination 
shows recognizable feminine characteristics convincing to 
everybody. I will therefore use this chapter to discuss this sub- 
ject particularly; I will preface it with the information, partly 
in excerpt, partly in full, which I sent earlier to the Directors 
of this Asylum. 

Since the District Court of Dresden decreed on the 13th 





108. Atthetime this note is being added (February 1901}, these states of bellowing 
occur every morning, when I leave my bed, get dressed and wash, or otherwise 
bare my body (even in the bath}, and lead to such extraordinary scenes that it is 
my opinion that every educated person would be convinced that supernatural 
things were happening to me. Unfortunately at that particular time of day I am 
only surrounded by uneducated attendants or lunatics, I consider it likely that in 
the course of time there will be a further change in these manifestations. 





Blessedness and voluptuousness... 


March 1900 that I was to be placed under tutelage, I sent a 
note on the 24th of the same month to the Directors of this 
Asylum in which I set out some of the more important points 
on the basis of which I was going to contest this decision, as 
in fact I have since done. I stated as my reasons that in any 
future proceedings the Director of the Asylum would be 
asked for a further expert report about me, and that it was 
therefore important to acquaint him with my own opinion 
about the nature of my illness, so as to draw his attention to 
certain points before the report was made. From my note of 
24th March 1900 the following passage is relevant: 


“It is of course far from my purpose to wish to convince 
other people by means of a reasoned argument of the 
truth of my so-called ‘delusions’ and ‘hallucinations.’ I 
am fully aware that at the present moment this would 
be possible only to a very limited extent. Whether in 
days to come a transformation of my body altogether be- 
yond the sphere of human experience, will not in itself 
furnish proof, the future alone can decide. There is only 
one point I wish to explain now: 


that I would at all times be prepared to submit my 
body to medical examination for ascertaining 
whether my assertion is correct, that my whole 
body is filled with nerves of voluptuousness from 
the top of my head to the soles of my feet, such as 
is the case only in the adult female body, whereas 
in the case of a man, as far as I know, nerves of 
voluptuousness are only found in and immedi- 
ately around the sexual organs. 


Should such an examination confirm that I am cor- 
rect in what I assert, and should medical science thus be 


iS peal 
243 
Le eel 


MEMOIRS 


forced to admit that such phenomena on a male body 
cannot be explained in a natural human way, then the 
‘delusion’ of my body being to a large extent subject to 
the influence of divine miracles must appear in a very 
different light even to a wider circle of people.” 


I followed this first note with a second on 26th March, 
which I render in its original form: 


As a sequel to my representation of 24th March, I beg to 
ask a favor of the Director of the Asylum. That note ex- 
plains why the development on my body of nerves of 
voluptuousness is of central importance to me both in 
regard to my religious ideas and as the main issue on 
which I intend to contest the order of the District Court 
placing me under tutelage. 

It would therefore be of great interest to me to obtain 
information on the following points: 


{1} Does the science of neurology acknowledge the 
existence of special nerves whose function it is to con- 
duct the sensation of voluptuousness (nerves of volup- 
tuousness or sensory nerves—an expression I heard 
Professor Weber use the other day—or whatever the sci- 
entific term may be)? 

(2) Is it correct, as I maintain, that such nerves of 
voluptuousness exist over the whole female body 
whereas in the male in the sexual organs and their prox- 
imity only; doI therefore mention a fact known to neu- 
rology or would it be regarded as erroneous in the 
present state of that science? 


I would be most grateful for an explanation either in 


writing or perhaps by the loan of a book dealing with 


aya 
244 
(eae) 





Blessedness and voluptuousness... 


neurology in a scientific manner, from which I could 
make the necessary excerpts myself. 


Your humble servant, 
Signed. 


I followed this up with a third note on 30th March as follows: 


Following my note of 26th March to the Director of the 
Asylum concerning the nerves of voluptuousness, 
Professor Weber was kind enough last night to grant me 
an interview and to lend me two books from the medical 
library. I now return once again to the aforementioned 
questions, not for the sake of my personal interest alone, 
but also because I consider that the transformations ob- 
servable on my body may possibly lead to new scientific 
insights in this field. 

If I understood Professor Weber correctly, the science 
of neurology does not recognize the existence of special 
nerves as carriers of sensuous pleasure; he also contra- 
dicted the view that such nerves are palpable from out- 
side, as little as nerves in general. On the other hand he 
did not dispute the fact that the feeling of sensual pleas- 
ure—whatever its physiological basis—occurs in the fe- 
male to a higher degree than in the male, involves the 
whole body, and that the mammae particularly play a 
very large part in the perception of sensuous pleasure. 
This fact can in my opinion only be explained in that 
some organs (whether they be called tendons or nerves 
or anything else) cover the whole female body more ex- 
tensively than the male body. For myself I am subjec- 
tively certain that my body—as I have repeatedly stated 
in consequence of divine miracles—shows such organs 
to an extent as only occurs in the female body. When I 


MEMOIRS 


exert light pressure with my hand on any part of my 
body I can feel certain string or cord-like structures 
under the skin; these are particularly marked on my 
chest where the woman’s bosom is, here they have the 
peculiarity that one can feel them ending in nodular 
thickenings. Through pressure on one such structure I 
can produce a feeling of female sensuous pleasure, par- 
ticularly if I think of something feminine. I do this, by 
the way, not for sensual lust, but I am absolutely com- 
pelled to do so if I want to achieve sleep or protect myself 
against otherwise almost unbearable pain. 

I felt exactly the same string or cord-like structures 
on my sister-in-law’s arm during a visit (after my atten- 
tion had been drawn to this point) and I presume there- 
fore that they are present on every female body in the 
same way. 

I also believe I am justified in thinking that these 
structures give the female skin its peculiar softness, 
which is also unusually noticeable on my body. 

I have to add that the female characteristics which 
are developing on my body show a certain periodicity at 
increasingly shorter intervals. The reason is that every- 
thing feminine attracts God’s nerves. Hence as often as 
one wishes to withdraw from me, one attempts to make 
the female characteristics which are evident on my body 
recede by miracle; the effect is that the structures which 
I call “nerves of voluptuousness” are pushed a little 
under the surface, that is to say are not so distinctly 
palpable on the skin, my bosom becomes a little flatter, 
etc. But when after a short time the rays have to ap- 
proach again, the “nerves of voluptuousness” (to retain 
this term) become more marked, my bosom bulges 
again, etc. Such changes occur at present in as short a pe- 
riod as a few minutes. 





Blessedness and voluptuousness... 


The Director of the Asylum can hardly doubt that 
with these expositions I am pursuing not only my per- 
sonal interests but also those of science; in uncovering 
these things which are in my opinion connected with 
supernatural matters, I trust I have not laid myself open 
to the reproach of having touched upon issues of which 
as a man I have to be ashamed. 


Your obedient servant, 
Signed. 


I want to add a few further remarks to the above. 

Of course I do not doubt that the information Professor 
Weber gave me during his conversation with me, which I men- 
tioned in my note of 30th March, is really representative of the 
present state of knowledge in the science of neurology. Never- 
theless, I cannot forego expressing my conviction, with the hu- 
mility a layman should show in such matters, that the string 
or cord-like structures described above, observable on my body, 
are in fact nerves, so that specific nerves of voluptuousness do 
exist, serving specifically to conduct the sensation of volup- 
tuousness. The proof lies for me in the fact that these struc- 
tures, as I know definitely, are by origin nothing but erstwhile 
nerves of God, which can hardly have lost their qualities as 
nerves through having entered my body; proof is also that I can 
provoke the actual sensation of voluptuousness at any mo- 
ment by gentle pressure on these structures. I may be excused 
therefore for retaining the term nerves of voluptuousness. 

For more than six years now my body has been filled with 
these nerves of voluptuousness through the continuous influx 
of rays or God’s nerves. It is therefore hardly surprising 
that my body is filled through and through with nerves of 
voluptuousness to an extent which cannot be surpassed even 
by a female being. The outward appearances show a regular 


Ope gel 
247 


MEMOIRS 


periodicity, as already mentioned in my note of 30th March, 
according to whether God has withdrawn to a greater distance 
—if thoughts are lacking which the rays must find in me—or 
has been forced to draw nearer to me. 

When the rays approach, my breast gives the impression of 
a pretty well-developed female bosom; this phenomenon can 
be seen by anybody who wants to observe me with his own 
eyes. I am therefore in a position to offer objective evidence 
by observation of my body. A brief glance however would not 
suffice, the observer would have to go to the trouble of spend- 
ing 10 or 15 minutes near me. In that way anybody would 
notice the periodic swelling and diminution of my bosom. 
Naturally hairs remain under my arms and on my chest; these 
are by the way sparse in my case; my nipples also remain 
small as in the male sex. Notwithstanding, I venture to assert 
flatly that anybody who sees me standing in front of a mirror 
with the upper part of my body naked would get the un- 
doubted impression of a female trunk—especially when the 
illusion is strengthened by some feminine adornments. I will 
not hesitate to add, that once I am outside this Asylum, I 
would grant an opportunity for observing my body to any 
serious specialist whose motive is scientific interest and not 
mere curiosity; I myself would however not instigate such an 
examination. If similar phenomena have never previously been 
observed on a male body, as I maintain, I believe I have thus 
furnished proof which must arouse serious doubt among seri- 
ous men as to whether what has so far been attributed to hallu- 
cinations and delusions is not after all reality, and therefore 
my whole belief in their miraculous nature and my explana- 
tion of the phenomena on my person and on my body not also 
founded on truth. 

I consider it my right and in a certain sense my duty to cul- 
tivate feminine feelings which I am enabled to do by the pres- 
ence of nerves of voluptuousness. In order not to lose through 





Blessedness and voluptuousness... 


such a confession the respect of other people whose opinion I 
value, I shall have to enter into further detail. 

Few people have been brought up according to such strict 
moral principles as I, and have throughout life practiced such 
moderation especially in matters of sex, as I venture to claim 
for myself. Mere low sensuousness can therefore not be con- 
sidered a motive in my case; were satisfaction of my manly 
pride still possible, I would naturally much prefer it; nor would 
I ever betray any sexual lust in contact with other people. But 
as soon as I am alone with God, if I may so express myself, I 
must continually or at least at certain times, strive to give di- 
vine rays the impression of a woman in the height of sexual de- 
light; to achieve this I have to employ all possible means, and 
have to strain all my intellectual powers and foremost my 
imagination. 

I have frequently referred in this book to the close relation- 
ship which exists between voluptuousness and everlasting 
Blessedness. Voluptuousness can be considered as part of ever- 
lasting Blessedness and is in a sense inherent in man and other 
living beings. In this light Schiller’s “Ode to Joy” is almost vi- 
sionary and reminiscent of divine inspiration: “Voluptuous- 
ness is given even to the worm, but it’s the Cherub who stands 
before God.” Nevertheless there is an essential difference. 
Voluptuous enjoyment or Blessedness is granted to souls in 
perpetuity and as an end in itself, but to human beings and 
other living creatures solely as a means for the preservation of 
the species. Herein lie the moral limitations of voluptuousness 
for human beings. An excess of voluptuousness would render 
man unfit to fulfill his other obligations; it would prevent him 
from ever rising to higher mental and moral perfection; indeed 
experience teaches that not only single individuals but also 
whole nations have perished through voluptuous excesses. For 
me such moral limits to voluptuousness no longer exist, in- 
deed in a certain sense the reverse applies. In order not to be 


MEMOIRS 


misunderstood, I must point out that when I speak of my duty 
to cultivate voluptuousness, I never mean any sexual desires 
towards other human beings (females) least of all sexual in- 
tercourse, but that I have to imagine myself as man and 
woman in one person having intercourse with myself, or 
somehow have to achieve with myself a certain sexual excite- 
ment, etc.—which perhaps under other circumstances might 
be considered immoral—but which has nothing whatever to do 
with any idea of masturbation or anything like it. 

This behavior has been forced on me through God having 
placed Himself into a relationship with me which is contrary 
to the Order of the World; although it may sound paradoxical, 
it is justifiable to apply the saying of the Crusaders in the First 
Crusade to myself: Dieu le veut (God wishes it). God is insepa- 
rably tied to my person through my nerves’ power of attraction 
which for some time past has become inescapable; there is 
no possibility of God freeing Himself from my nerves for the 
rest of my life—although His policy is aimed at this—except 
perhaps in case my unmanning were to become a fact. On the 
other hand God demands constant enjoyment, as the normal 
mode of existence for souls within the Order of the World. It is 
my duty to provide Him with it in the form of highly devel- 
oped soul-voluptuousness, as far as this is possible in the 
circumstances contrary to the Order of the World. If I can get 
a little sensuous pleasure in this process, I feel I am entitled 
to it as a small compensation for the excess of suffering and 
privation that has been mine for many years past; it also af- 
fords some small recompense for the manifold painful trials 
and tribulations which I have to suffer even now, particularly 
when soul-voluptuousness diminishes. I know that I do not 
offend against any moral duty, but am merely doing what 
sense dictates in these irregular circumstances; for the effect 
on the relationship to my wife, see my remarks in Chapter 13, 
footnote 76. 


4 
250 
4 





Blessedness and voluptuousness... 


It is naturally impossible for me to spend the whole day or 
even the greater part of it with voluptuous ideas or to direct 
my imagination to them. It would be beyond human nature to 
do this; human beings are not born only for voluptuous pleas- 
ure, and therefore mere voluptuousness as the sole purpose of 
life would be as unnatural for me as anyone else. On the other 
hand, continual thinking, uninterrupted activity of the nerves 
of intellect without any respite, such as the rays impose on me 
through compulsive thinking, is equally incompatible with 
human nature. The art of conducting my life in the mad posi- 
tion I find myself—and I do not mean here the relationship 
with my environment but the absurd relation between God 
and myself which is contrary to the Order of the World— 
consists in finding a fitting middle course in which both par- 
ties, God and man, fare best; in other words, if divine rays find 
soul-voluptuousness in my body which they can share—which 
alone makes entering my body acceptable to them—while I 
retain the necessary rest for my nerves of intellect, particularly 
at night, and the capacity to occupy myself in a manner com- 
mensurate with my intellectual needs. 

This cannot be achieved without some unpleasantness for 
both sides, both being forced to behave in a manner really con- 
trary to their nature. Soul-voluptuousness is not always pres- 
ent in full measure but periodically recedes, partly because God 
takes withdrawal action, partly because I cannot constantly 
cultivate voluptuousness. Yet every mental activity as well as 
indulging in man’s natural right of thinking nothing (particu- 
larly when out walking) is always accompanied by a consider- 
able decrease in bodily well-being. To find necessary rest from 
intellectual activity particularly sleep at night, also in day-time 
for instance after the main meal and in the early morning on 
awakening, I feel Iam entitled to make my physical condition 
bearable even to the extent of obtaining a feeling of sensuous 
well-being by cultivating voluptuousness in the above sense. 


iriee 7 
251 





MEMOIRS 


The experience of years has confirmed me in this view; 
indeed I believe that God would never attempt to withdraw 
(which always impairs my bodily well-being considerably} but 
would follow my attraction without resistance permanently 
and uninterruptedly, if only I could always be playing the 
woman’s part in sexual embrace with myself, always rest my 
gaze on female beings, always look at female pictures, etc. 

I also wish to mention that the lower God (Ariman] in fact 
confirmed this, when some time ago he recommended a cer- 
tain mode of behavior in a number of phrases incorporated in 
the writing-down-system and spoken by the rays. Particularly 
such sentences as “voluptuousness has become God-fearing” 
and “excite yourself sexually” were often heard from the voices 
emanating from the lower God. Clearly the usual ideas of 
morality have been reversed in my relation to God. Voluptuous- 
ness is permissible for human beings if sanctified in the bond 
of marriage it serves the purpose of reproduction; but in itself 
it never counted for much. In my relation to God, however, 
voluptuousness has become “God-fearing,” that is to say it is 
the likeliest satisfactory solution for the clash of interests aris- 
ing out of circumstances contrary to the Order of the World. 

As soon as I allow a pause in my thinking without devoting 
myself to the cultivation of voluptuousness—which is of course 
unavoidable as nobody can either think all the time or always 
cultivate voluptuousness—the following unpleasant conse- 
quences mentioned earlier occur: attacks of bellowing and bod- 
ily pain; vulgar noises from the madmen around me, and cries 
of “help” from God. Mere common sense therefore commands 
that as far as humanly possible I fill every pause in my think- 
ing—in other words the periods of rest from intellectual activ- 
ity—with the cultivation of voluptuousness. 


4 
252 





Final considerations. Future 


prospects 


a] 


| HAVE ARRIVED at the end of my work. I have by no 
means exhausted the experiences and supernatural impres- 
sions I received during almost seven years of nervous illness; 
but I think I have rendered sufficient of the circumstances to 
allow an understanding of my religious views and to explain 
certain peculiarities of my conduct. It only remains for me to 
say a word about the future. 

“What will come of this cursed affair?” and “What will be- 
come of me? should he”® (scilicet say or think}—such are the 
questions which have for years been spoken into my head by 
the rays in endless repetition; even if they rest on falsifications 
and do not render my own thoughts, yet they give a hint that 





109. “He” in the above sentence, as in many others, naturally refers to me. 
Perhaps the sentence should be completed with “he who alone remains of interest 
to us (the rays)“ or something similar. My name is apparently not mentioned on 
purpose because one seems to suffer from the illusion that a time must come 
when my own identity will no longer be known to me. 


MEMOIRS 


even God is aware of a thoroughly mismanaged affair. The an- 
swers which the rays themselves give to these questions, that 
is to say falsely ascribe to my nerves (“A new race of human 
beings from the spirit of Schreber” and “I don’t know, should 
he,” etc.) are so childish that I need not dwell on them any 
longer. My own conception is as follows. 

It is of course impossible to predict with certainty what 
will become of me or in what way one can guide back into nor- 
mal channels the circumstances contrary to the Order of the 
World in which God apparently finds himself towards the 
whole earth in consequence of my nerves’ attraction. Such is 
the confusion that there is no analogy in human experience 
and no provision seems to exist in the Order of the World to 
deal with such a situation. Who would want to predict the fu- 
ture in such circumstances? All I can say with absolute cer- 
tainty is something negative, namely that God will never 
succeed in his purpose of destroying my reason. I have been ab- 
solutely clear on this point for years, as mentioned above 
(Chapter 20, p. 235); with it the main danger which seemed to 
threaten me during the early years of my illness is removed. 
Can there be any prospect more terrible for a human being so 
highly gifted in such various ways, as I may say of myself with- 
out conceit, than the prospect of losing one’s reason and per- 
ishing an imbecile? Hence anything which might befall me 
seemed more or less trivial, once I had gained the absolute con- 
viction through years of experience that all attempts in this di- 
rection were predestined to fail, as within the Order of the 
World not even God has the power to destroy a person’s reason. 

Naturally I have also occupied myself with the question of 
my future in a positive way. For several years after I had com- 
pletely changed my ideas (described in Chapter 13) I lived in 
the certain expectation that one day my unmanning (trans- 
formation into a woman) would be completed; this solution 
seemed to me absolutely essential as preparation for the re- 





Final considerations. ,, 


newal of mankind, particularly while I thought the rest of 
mankind had perished. Indeed, I still regard this as the solution 
most in accordance with the essence of the Order of the World. 
Unmanning for the purpose of renewing the race has in all 
probability actually occurred several times in earlier periods in 
the history of the universe (compare Chapter 5), perhaps on 
our earth, perhaps on other planets. Many miracles enacted 
on my person (compare beginning of Chapter 11), as well as 
the filling of my body with nerves of voluptuousness, also 
unequivocally signify unmanning. But whether in the condi- 
tions contrary to the Order of the World (tying-to-celestial- 
bodies, etc.) which God established after the appearance of 
tested souls, unmanning can really be completed I dare not 
predict; it is even more difficult to predict the future since I 
have had to correct my earlier view that mankind had per- 
ished. It is therefore possible, indeed probable, that to the end 
of my days there will be strong indications of femaleness, but 
that I shall die as a man. 

This raises the further question, whether I am at all mortal 
and what could possibly cause my death. From what I experi- 
enced of the restorative power of divine rays on my body (com- 
pare earlier discussion of this} I believe that ordinary illnesses, 
even external violence cannot possibly cause my death. If for 
instance I were to fall into water or wished to put a bullet 
through my head or chest—ideas I of course no longer harbor— 
I would expect temporary signs corresponding to those of death 
by drowning or unconsciousness following a bullet wound 
which would be fatal in other people. But as long as contact 
with rays remains, it can hardly be denied that I would be re- 
vived again, the action of the heart and circulation restarted 
and the destroyed inner organs and bones restored. One has 
only to remember how in the first years of my illness I often 
lived deprived of, or with seriously injured internal organs, 
with parts of my skeleton destroyed, which in others would 


MEMOIRS 


hardly be compatible with survival. The forces which then re- 
stored my destroyed organs are still active, and therefore I can 
hardly imagine that I could die from such causes as mentioned 
above. The same applies to possible death from natural causes, 
i.e. illness. Therefore it appears that I could only die from what 
is commonly called senility. Even science cannot say what 
death from senility really is. Although the external appear- 
ances can be described, the real cause has as far as I know not 
been found: there is as yet no certain answer to the question 
why a human being must die beyond a certain age. As far as I 
can see all created beings are only allotted a certain measure of 
vitality which when exhausted leads to failure of vital organs. I 
therefore imagine that although the rays can remedy any dam- 
age done to a body which retains its vital powers, they cannot 
replace these vital powers themselves. 

The other aspect of this question is what is to become 
of God—if I may so express myself—should I die. I am certain 
that the whole relation into which God brought Himself to 
our earth and to other human beings rests at present upon 
the particular relation which exists between Him and me. 
Hence should my person disappear through death, this relation 
would have to change; whether this change would be obvious 
to other human beings I cannot say. Perhaps one would then 
of necessity be forced to measures which would ensure the 
return of the normal Order of the World (such as discontinuing 
the tying-to-celestial-bodies, complete suppression of the re- 
maining tested souls, etc.), measures which so far one has 
not had the will power to carry through. Only in this way, I 
believe, wil! God be able to resume once again the functions 
which are His duty within the Order of the World, in particular 
to resume His task of founding anew states of Blessedness. That 
my nerves would be among the first to be raised to a state 
of Blessedness I consider as almost certain in view of the rela- 
tion which for years has existed between me and God. What 


(eter 
256 
(es ae 





Final considerations... 


detailed measures God would have to adopt after my death I 
feel I can hardly as much as speculate on, as it would mean 
abolishing those arrangements which are contrary to the Order 
of the World and of these I attained only a somewhat hazy 
notion. 

As regards the form my life will take until my death I 
believe I can expect in measurable time and without any par- 
ticular difficulty a certain amelioration in my external circum- 
stances, suspension of my tutelage, discharge from the Asylum, 
etc. Whatever people may think of my “delusions,” they will 
sooner or later have to acknowledge that they are not dealing 
with a lunatic in the ordinary sense. 

But not even this would afford me compensation for the 
sufferings and privations of the last seven years. I have the im- 
pression therefore that in my future life some great and mag- 
nificent satisfaction is in store for me—not provided by human 
beings but somehow as a logical development arising out of 
the situation itself. While still in Flechsig’s Asylum, when I 
had my first glimpses of the miraculous harmony of the Order 
of the World, and also suffered wounding humiliations and was 
daily threatened by horrifying dangers, I coined this phrase for 
the rays: there must be an equalizing justice and it can never 
be that a morally unblemished human being with feet firmly 
planted in the Order of the World should have to perish as the 
innocent victim of other people's sins in a struggle carried on 
against him by hostile powers. This sentence, for which I had 
only little evidence at the time and which was mostly intu- 
itive, proved in the course of years correct almost beyond my 
expectation. The scales of victory are coming down on my side 
more and more, the struggle against me continues to lose its 
previous hostile character, the growing soul-voluptuousness 
makes my physical condition and my other outward circum- 
stances more bearable. And so I believe I am not mistaken in 
expecting that a very special palm of victory will eventually be 


MEMOIRS 


mine. I cannot say with any certainty what form it will take. 
As possibilities I would mention that my unmanning will be 
accomplished with the result that by divine fertilization off- 
spring will issue from my lap, or alternatively that great fame 
will be attached to my name surpassing that of thousands of 
other people much better mentally endowed. Such thoughts 
may seem fantastic and chimerical, perhaps even ridiculous 
considering the pitiful and restricted circumstances in which 
I still lead my life. Only he who knows the ful] measure of 
my sufferings in past years can understand that such thoughts 
were bound to arise in me. When I think of my sacrifices 
through loss of an honorable professional position, a happy 
marriage practically dissolved, deprived of all the pleasures of 
life, subjected to bodily pain, mental torture and terrors of a 
hitherto unknown kind, the picture emerges of a martyrdom 
which all in all I can only compare with the crucifixion of 
Jesus Christ. On the other hand there is the immense back- 
ground of the picture of which my person and my personal fate 
only form the foreground. If it be true that the continuation 
of all creation on our earth rests entirely on the very special 
relations into which God entered with me, the reward of vic- 
tory could only be something very extraordinary for my loyal 
perseverance in the struggle for my reason and for the purifica- 
tion of God. 

I come to the last point of my work. I consider it possible, 
even likely, that the future development of my personal fate, 
the spread of my religious ideas and the weight of proof of their 
truth will lead to a fundamental revolution in mankind’s reli- 
gious views unequaled in history. I do not underestimate the 
dangers which might arise from the overthrow of all existing 
religious systems. But I trust the victorious powers of truth 
will be sufficiently strong to cancel out any damage caused 
through a temporary confusion of religious feelings. 

Even if many, particularly Christian dogmas hitherto ac- 





Final considerations... 


cepted as true, would have to be revised, the absolutely certain 
knowledge that a living God exists and the soul lives on after 
death could only come as a blessing to mankind: and so I close 
in the hope that in this sense favorable stars will watch over 
the success of my labor. 


raat 
259 


POSTSCRIPTS 
TO THE 
“MEMOIRS” 








OcTOBER 1900-JuNE 1901 


FIRST SERIES 


I 
CONCERNING MIRACLES 
(OCTOBER 1900) 


THE MIRACLES DIRECTED against me naturally con- 
tinue without interruption. The longer they last the more they 
take on the character of a comparatively harmless prank, for 
reasons previously mentioned. A small example may show 
what I mean. 

On 5th October 1900 while being shaved I received a small 
cut, which had quite frequently happened before. Walking 
through the garden afterwards I met the Government Assessor 
M.,; he noted at once the inconspicuous little piece of sponge 
covering my cut (of about this size O) and asked me about it; I 
told him truthfully, that the barber had cut me. 

This little event is extremely interesting and instructive for 
me as I know its deeper connections. There can be no doubt 
that the cut was the result of a divine miracle emanating from 


ena) 
263 
epeepa 





POSTSCRIPTS 


the upper God, as I have learnt from countless similar events. 
Needing an “interference” in the sense previously mentioned, 
God acted on the muscles of the barber's hand to give it a rapid 
movement which caused the cut. 

The Government Assessor M. at once started to talk of this 
small wound, because God (in the conditions contrary to the 
Order of the World) likes to make the effects of His miracles 
on me the subject of conversation; this seems to flatter the 
rays’ peculiar vanity."° The miracle affected the Government 
Assessor M. apparently in a twofold manner; namely his eye- 
muscles which led him to observe the cut and the piece of 
sponge above my lip, and also his nerves (his will) which led 
him to ask the cause of the injury. The question was framed in 
something like these words: “What is that on your mouth?” 

I have made innumerable similar observations of the mira- 
cles causing my mouth, my hand, the tablecloth or the napkin 
to be dirtied when I was eating. These seemed particularly fre- 
quent during my wife’s or sister’s visit, for instance when 
drinking cocoa in their presence. The miracles caused cocoa to 
be spilt on my mouth, my hand, the tablecloth or napkin, and 
without fail my wife or sister made some reproachful remarks. 

I have similar experiences when eating at the Director’s 
table or in other circumstances. Plates simply break in two 
without any rough handling, or objects which the servants or 
others present or even I myself hold (for instance my chess- 
men, my pen, my cigar-holder, etc.) are suddenly flung to the 
floor, where those that are breakable naturally break into 
pieces. All this is due to miracles; for this reason the damage 
caused is made the topic of conversation by people around me, 
usually some time afterwards. 


110. In this they resemble human beings. Human beings also are always pleased 
when recognition of their achievement or industry, etc., is remarked on. 





First Series 


II 
CONCERNING THE RELATION OF 
DIVINE TO HUMAN INTELLIGENCE 
(11TH OCTOBER 1900} 


I think one is entitled to assert that divine intelligence equals 
at least the sum total of all the intelligences of previous gener- 
ations of human beings. For God assimilates all human nerves 
after death and thus unites the sum total of their intelligences 
in Himself while gradually divesting them of those recollec- 
tions which are of interest only to the individual but of no use 
as part of a universally valuable intelligence. 

I am for instance in no doubt that God is acquainted with 
the idea of railways. How did he achieve this knowledge? 
God (conditions prevailing which are in consonance with the 
Order of the World) gains only the external impression of a 
traveling train, as of all other events on earth; there would al- 
ways have been the possibility that by means of nerve-contact 
with a human being acquainted with the nature of railways He 
could get further information about their purpose and func- 
tion. Yet it is hard to imagine why He should want to. In any 
case in the course of time the nerves of whole generations of 
human beings, who were all familiar with the significance of 
railways, accrued to God. In this way God achieved a knowl- 
edge of railways. 

Is one therefore to assume that God attains His wisdom 
only through the intelligences of previous human generations? 
Obviously everything speaks against such an assumption. If 
God Himself created man and all other living beings, one can- 
not assume that His intelligence is due to what He receives 
from man. One cannot avoid postulating an intrinsic divine 
wisdom particularly in the sphere of creation. But it is not 
altogether incompatible with His knowledge about creation 
that God gains the insight He certainly possesses into human 


POSTSCRIPTS 


affairs, human intellectual life, human language, etc., only 
through assimilating countless human nerves. 

This assumption is irrefutable because God uses human 
language in talking to me, particularly German (as when cir- 
cumstances in consonance with the Order of the World still 
prevailed He used the basic language when communicating 
with souls}, even in cries of “help,” or when the lower God 
Ariman partaking in soul-voluptuousness, gives expression to 
genuine feeling with the words “I am pleased.” 


III 
CONCERNING PLAY-WITH-HUMAN-BEINGS 
(JANUARY 1901) 


Since writing my Memoirs I have made many more observa- 
tions on the so-called “play-with-human-beings” (compare 
Chapter 7 and particularly Chapter 15 of the Memoirs). I have 
gone for almost daily walks and excursions into the town and 
surroundings of Pirna, have several times been to the theater, 
attended Divine Service in the Asylum, and once even visited 
my wife in Dresden. In this way I naturally saw a great number 
of other people, in Dresden the whole bustle of city life. All 
this made it undeniable that manifestations of life in human 
beings (and animals) are not exclusively caused by the influ- 
ence of rays, but that such manifestations of life can also come 
about independent of the influence of rays—a fact I had 
thought probable even before. (Compare Chapter 15 of the 
Memoirs, where I pointed out that this question was still mys- 
terious.'"} For instance, when I listen to a performance in the 
theater or to a sermon in Church cannot really maintain that 





111. When one remembers that for six years I was locked up within the walls of 
the Asylum, and apart from brief medical visits and a few visits from my relatives, 


eal 
266 
eee 





First Series 


every word spoken by the actors on the stage or by the parson 
in the pulpit is caused by their nerves being influenced by 
miracles; naturally I have no doubt that even had I myself not 
been there the performance in the theater or the Divine 
Service in Church would have taken place just the same. Yet 
my observations on these and many similar occasions have 
convinced me that my presence is not without influence on 
the behavior of other human beings; in order to bring about the 
“interferences” (compare Chapters 10 and 15) necessary for the 
withdrawal of the rays the people around me are made the ob- 
jects of miracles. This was least noticeable during my visits to 
the theater and the Church. The reason is that at these occa- 
sions God Himself was in a sense present in the theater and 
the Church (that is to say He shared by way of nerve-contact 
all my visual and auditory impressions during the performance 
in the theater and Divine Service}; and the rays, always inquis- 
itive, were so absorbed in watching the spectacle that their 
tendency to withdraw was minimal. However, even here some 
“interferences” occurred, confined to a few soft words from 
the people in the Church or theater or to attacks of coughing 
on the part of the actors or the individuals making up the pub- 
lic in the theater or the congregation in the Church. 

I was certain that these phenomena were caused by mira- 
cles, because at other times my head started to ache (compare 
Chapter 15 of the Memoirs) and the voices to talk simultane- 
ously. I experience the same during every excursion into the 
streets of Pirna or its environment, when I visit shops or 
restaurants; even total strangers who are in the same room 
with me in public houses in the surrounding villages on pur- 
pose use words in their conversation which have a bearing on 


saw only mentally deranged patients and uneducated attendants, it will be under- 
standable why the above question and what is connected with it was obscure 
to me. 


Tent 
267 
Soe) 


POSTSCRIPTS 


the writing-down-material mentioned in Chapter 9. But I must 
add that the writing-down-material has increased to such an 
extent that it now includes almost all the words used in the 
human language. One is tempted therefore to think that it may 
be sheer coincidence. Nevertheless the continual reiteration of 
certain words is sufficiently obvious to leave no doubt of the 
deliberate stimulation of the corresponding human nerves to 
use these words. Equally significant is the wordless silence 
which occurs in my environment at certain times (compare 
Chapter 15 of the Memoirs) particularly when I play the piano 
and read the text to the music, that is to say when I recite the 
words in the nerve-language, or when J read a book, a newspa- 
per or part of my Memoirs, etc., with concentration, even when 
I occasionally sing aloud. One would expect the attendants to 
continue going about their usual occupations along the corri- 
dor and patients to leave their rooms as usual. This however is 
not the case; but they do so regularly in the twinkle of an eye 
(at first sight) as soon as I stop whatever! am doing and indulge 
in thinking nothing, or if soul-voluptuousness becomes so strong 
by the union of all rays that withdrawal action is called for and 
to that purpose an “interference” produced. I can only explain 
it in this way: although the persons concerned have them- 
selves the ability to act the way they do, nevertheless they 
would not do so at that moment had they not received the im- 
pulse to such action from the rays, eg. leaving their room, 
opening my door (frequently done purposely by patients), etc. 


IV 
CONCERNING HALLUCINATIONS 
{FEBRUARY 1901) 


By hallucinations one understands, as far as I know, stimula- 
tion of nerves by virtue of which a person with a nervous ill- 





First Series 


ness believes he has impressions of events in the external 
world, usually perceived through the sense of seeing or hear- 
ing, which in reality do not exist. Science seems to deny 
any reality background for hallucinations, judging from what 
I have read for instance in Kraepelin, PSYCHIATRY, Vol. 1, 
p. 102 ff., 6th Edition. In my opinion this is definitely erro- 
neous, at least if so generalized. I admit that in many, perhaps 
most cases, the objects and events which hallucinated persons 
believe to have observed exist only in their imagination. Such 
for instance is the case when people suffering from delirium 
tremens, as even I as a layman know, see “little men” or “little 
mice” which of course do not really exist. The same may be 
presumed for many of the other visual and auditory hallucina- 
tions discussed by Kraepelin. (Compare Vol. 1, p. 145 ff., 6th 
Edition.) But serious doubts in such a rationalistic and purely 
materialistic (if I may say so) attitude must arise in cases 
where one is dealing with voices “of supernatural origin” (com- 
pare Kraepelin, Vol. 1, p. 117, 6th Edition). I can of course 
only speak with certainty of myself when I maintain that an 
external cause for these sensations exists; however, it is sug- 
gestive that there have been or are similar cases. In other 
words, those sensory impressions which are supposed to be 
solely subjective (illusions, hallucinations, or as the laity call 
them, sheer figments of imagination) may in other cases also 
have some objective basis, even if incomparably less than in 
my own case; that is to say they are brought about by super- 
natural factors. 

In order to make myself clearer I will try to describe more 
closely the auditory and visual impressions I receive as “voices,” 
“visions,” etc. But I wish to stress again as in other places 
(Chapter 6 of the Memoirs}, that I do not object in the least to 
considering a morbidly excited nervous system a necessary 
condition for the development of all such phenomena. Human 
beings who are fortunate enough to enjoy healthy nerves 











POSTSCRIPTS 


cannot (as a rule anyway)!” have “illusions,” “hallucinations,” 
“visions,” or whatever expression one wants to use for these 
phenomena; it would therefore certainly be desirable if all hu- 
man beings remained free from such experiences; they would 
then subjectively feel very much better. But this does not im- 
ply that the events resulting from a diseased nervous system 
are altogether unfounded in objective reality or have to be re- 
garded as nervous excitations lacking all external cause. I can 
therefore not share Kraepelin’s astonishment which he ex- 
presses repeatedly (for instance Vol. 1, pp. 112, 116, 162, etc., 
6th Edition) that the “voices,” etc., seem to have a far greater 
power of conviction for hallucinated patients than “anything 
said by those around them.” A person with sound nerves is, so 
to speak, mentally blind compared with him who receives su- 
pernatural impressions by virtue of his diseased nerves; he is 
therefore as little likely to persuade the visionary of the unre- 
ality of his visions as a person who can see will be persuaded 
by a really blind person that there are no colors, that blue is 
not blue, red not red, etc. With this preamble I will now pro- 
ceed to discuss the nature of the voices that talk to me and the 
visions I receive. 

The “voices” manifest themselves in me as nervous im- 
pulses, and always have the character of soft lisping noises 
sounding like distinct human words—with the only exception 
of one night, at the beginning of July 1894 (see beginning of 
Chapter 10). Both their content and the rate at which they are 
spoken have changed considerably in the course of the years. 

The most important points about them have already been 
mentioned; predominant is their absolute nonsense as the 
phrases are stylistically incomplete, and the many terms of 
abuse which aim at provoking me; that is to say to make me 





112. Aspossible exceptions I would instance the cases of vision-like experience re- 
lated in the Bible. 


ine a 
270 
ire 





First Series 


break the silence necessary for sleep. If it is true that provok- 
ing voices are also heard by other auditorily hallucinated per- 
sons,''? as noted by Kraepelin, Vol. 1, p. 116, 6th Edition, I 
must state one fact which I believe makes my case characteris- 
tically different from all similar cases, so that no comparison 
can be made between the stimulation of my senses and the 
hallucinations occurring in other people; they must therefore 
have an entirely different cause. I presume, although not accu- 
rately informed on the matter, that other persons hear voices 
only intermittently, in other words that the hallucinations oc- 
cur only at intervals with pauses free from voices. Such pauses 
never occur in my case; since the beginning of my contact 
with God—with the sole exception of the first weeks when 
there were still “unholy” times as well as “holy” times (com- 
pare the end of Chapter 6 of the Memoirs)—that is to say for 
about almost seven years—except during sleep—I have never 
had a single moment in which I did not hear voices. They ac- 
company me to every place and at all times; they continue to 
sound even when I am in conversation with other people, they 
persist undeterred even when I concentrate on other things, for 
instance read a book or a newspaper, play the piano, etc.; only 
when I am talking aloud to other people or to myself are they 
of course drowned by the stronger sound of the spoken word 
and therefore inaudible to me. But the well-known phrases 
recommence at once, sometimes in the middle of a sentence, 


113. When Kraepelin, Vol 1, p. 116, 6th Edition, reports that provoking voices are 
heard by hallucinated persons as coming from grunting pigs, affronting or barking 
dogs, crowing cocks, etc., he is in my opinion dealing with the same phenomena 
which I considered in Chapter 17 of the Memoirs at the end of the discussion on 
the subjective feelings caused by the seemingly talking chain-steamers, railway 
trains, etc. It is obviously only a simultaneously heard sounding of external noises 
added to the nervous impulses perceived as voices, so that these noises seem to 
echo the words spoken by the voices. These have to be clearly distinguished, in 


my case at any rate, from the genuinely talking voices of the birds, the sun, etc. 


faeugend 
271 
es 





POSTSCRIPTS 


which tells me that the conversation had continued during the 
interval, that is to say that those nervous stimuli or vibrations 
responsible for the weaker sounds of the voices continue even 
while I talk aloud. 

The tempo in which one speaks has slowed down almost 
beyond imagination as mentioned in Chapter 16 of the 
Memoirs and even since then. I have already given the reason: 
the more my body’s soul-voluptuousness has increased—and it 
is increasing rapidly and constantly through the uninterrupted 
influx of God’s nerves—the more slowly one must let the 
voices speak so as to bridge the vast distances between my 
body and their celestial abode with their few meager ever- 
recurring phrases available."* The hissing of the voices is now 
best compared to the sound of sand trickling from an hour 
glass. I can distinguish individual words hardly at all or only 
with the greatest difficulty. Naturally I do not trouble to do 
this, on the contrary I try to ignore what is spoken. However, 
when I do hear individual words from well-known phrases, I 
cannot prevent my memory supplying the continuation (well- 
known to me by thousandfold repetition) so that the “auto- 
matic-remembering-thought,” as this phenomenon is called in 
the soul-language, itself causes my nerves to vibrate till the 
sentence is finished. But while at first I felt this tremendous 
slowing down as increasing nervous impatience (compare 
Chapter 16), it actually led to steady improvement. As long as I 
listened to the voices and indeed had to automatically, it was 
extremely painful for me to endure a delay of several 
seconds in the expected continuation of a sentence. But the 


114. “If only you had not committed soul murder”; “He must be done by now”; 
“Fancy such a person was a Senatsprdsident”; “Are you not ashamed then,” sci- 
licet in front of your wife; “Why do you not say it,” namely aloud? “Do you still 
speak,” scilicet foreign languages? “That was now really” scilicet namely too 


much according to the soul-cunception, etc., etc. 


pa 
272 
Ee 7 





First Series 


slowing down has recently become still more marked and the 
voices, as stated, degenerated into an indistinct hissing. I have 
therefore been able to get so used to it that instead of doing 
something (like playing the piano, reading, writing, etc.}, 
which anyhow drowns the voices, I simply count 1, 2, 3, 4, 
etc., in the nerve-language; this gives me a break in thinking 
(the so-called not-thinking-of-anything-thought). I achieve at 
least the one result, that a swear word must then be spoken 
which distinctly sounds in my mind's ear and which I then al- 
low to be talked into my nerves as often as I like. The regular 
swear word in these circumstances is so vulgar that I will not 
commit it to paper; anybody interested could gather it from 
my many scattered notes. As soon as the “inner voices” are 
thus silenced, the rays must approach again and I hear words 
from the talking birds impinging on my ears from outside. 
What they say is naturally immaterial to me; one will readily 
understand that—having got used to it through the years—I 
am no longer hurt when the birds I feed shout at me (or more 
correctly lisp at me) “Are you not ashamed” (in front of your 
wife)? and suchlike. All this again exemplifies the truth of the 
saying that every nonsense carried to extremes destroys itself 
in the end—a truth which the lower God (Ariman) repeatedly 
affirmed in the phrase “All nonsense cancels itself out.” 
Visual stimuli (visual hallucinations) are in my case almost 
as persistent as auditory stimuli (voices, auditory hallucina- 
tions). With my mind's eye I see the rays which are both the 
carriers of the voices and of the poison of corpses to be un- 
loaded on my body, as long drawn-out filaments approaching 
my head from some vast distant spot on the horizon. I can see 
them only with my mind’s eye when my eyes are closed by 
miracles or when I close them voluntarily, that is to say they 
are then reflected on my inner nervous system as long fila- 
ments stretching towards my head. I see the same phenomena 
with my bodily eye when I keep my eyes open; I see these 





POSTSCRIPTS 


filaments, as it were, from one or more far distant spots beyond 
the horizon stretching sometimes towards my head, sometimes 
withdrawing from it. Every withdrawal is accompanied by a 
keenly felt, at times intense, pain in my head.’ The threads 
which are pulled into my head—they are also the carriers of 
the voices—perform a circular movement in it, best compared 
to my head being hollowed out from inside with a drill. 

It is easy to imagine that very unpleasant sensations can be 
connected with this; yet bodily pain itself has been of second- 
ary importance at least during the last years. Human beings 
get used to many kinds of bodily pain, which at first are very 
frightening and almost unbearable. Hence the pain I still have 
to suffer every day—alternating regularly with periods of volup- 
tuousness—has latterly not been so severe as to hinder me se- 
riously from undertaking some intellectual activity or a quiet 
conversation with other people, etc. Much greater nuisance is 
caused by the states of bellowing which regularly accompany 
the withdrawal of the rays. Naturally I consider it beneath my 
dignity to have to bellow like a wild animal because of mira- 
cles enacted on me; furthermore the bellowing itself when 
repeated leads to equally painful concussion of the head. 
Nevertheless at certain times I have to allow the bellowing as 
long as it is not excessive, particularly at night when other de- 


115. Apart from my head, pain is also caused on other parts of my body where the 
poison of corpses is unloaded. All parts of my body are affected; sometimes my 
belly (this always with the simultaneous question: “Why do you not sh..”} is 
filled with foul matter producing an acute call to stool, even occasionally sudden 
diarrhea; sometimes I feel stabbing pains in the lungs, in the seminal cord, paraly- 
sis of the fingers (particularly when playing the piano and writing}, sometimes 
more or less severe pains in the lower extremities (knee-cap, thighs, swelling of 
the feet so that my boots become too tight) when walking, etc., etc. Not all mira- 
cles are due to the unloading of the poison of corpses, often they are caused di- 
rectly by the power of the rays themselves, as for instance closing the eyes, all 
states of paralysis, etc. 


= 
274 
L 





First Series 


fensive measures like talking aloud, playing the piano, etc., are 
hardly practicable. In such circumstances bellowing has the 
advantage of drowning with its noise everything the voices 
speak into my head, so that soon all rays are again united. This 
allows me to go to sleep again or at least to stay in bed in a 
state of physical well-being when, in the early morning, the 
time for getting up approaches but my sitting-room cannot yet 
be used because of the necessary airing, cleaning, etc. 

I must always be guided by a purposeful thought, essential 
for human beings, but apparently incomprehensible to the 
rays; I must ask myself every moment: Do you now want to go 
to sleep or rest or follow some intellectual occupation or carry 
out some bodily function, for instance empty yourself, etc? To 
accomplish any purpose the union of all rays is usually neces- 
sary, even for emptying myself (as mentioned at the end of 
Chapter 21 of the Memoirs) because despite talking a great 
deal about “Sh....,” one always tries to force back the need to 
empty myself by means of miracles, as its satisfaction causes 
soul-voluptuousness. I must therefore put up temporarily with 
such evils as bellowing when I want to go to sleep, empty my- 
self, etc., to be able to do in concreto what is indispensible for 
one’s bodily well-being; emptying in particular which one tries 
to prevent by miracles, I now achieve best when I sit on a 
bucket in front of the piano and play until I can first piss and 
then—usually after some straining—empty my bowels. How- 
ever incredible this may sound it is true; for by playing the pi- 
ano I force the rays trying to withdraw from me to approach, 
and so overcome the opposition put up against my efforts to 
empty my bowels. 

I wish to add some interesting points concerning visions 
(visual hallucinations). The first is that the filaments aiming 
at my head and apparently originating from the sun or other 
distant stars do not come towards me in a straight line but in 
a kind of circle or parabola, similar perhaps to the way the 





POSTSCRIPTS 


chariots in the games of the old Romans drove round the Meta, 
or a special variety of skittles where the ball fastened to a 
string is first thrown around a post before it strikes the 
ninepins. I clearly saw this circle or parabola in my head (with 
my eyes open in the sky itself); the filaments which function 
as carriers for the voices do not as a rule come from the direc- 
tion of where the sun actually is in the sky (although they is- 
sue at least partly from it) but from a more or less opposite 
direction. I believe I am justified in connecting this with the 
previously (Chapter 9 of the Memoirs) discussed “tying-the- 
rays-to-celestial-bodies.” The rays’ direct approach must be 
prevented or at least slowed down by some mechanical means; 
otherwise they would simply shoot down into my body, drawn 
to it by the enormously increased power of attraction, and still 
further augment the soul-voluptuousness in my body; in other 
words God would hardly be able to contain Himself in heaven, 
if I may so express it. When this happens bright spots of light 
appear in my head, or when my eyes are open, in the sky it- 
self—at present at comparatively short intervals. It is the same 
vision I previously called the Ormuzd sun (Chapter 7, footnote 
44 of the Memoirs) because I thought the spots of light were 
the reflections of some tremendously distant celestial body 
which, owing to its tremendous distance, appeared to the hu- 
man eye only as a tiny disc or spot of light like the stars. After 
innumerable similar observations in the course of years, I feel 
inclined to modify this view. I now feel justified in assuming 
that the spots of light are particles of rays broken off from 
the totality of the upper God’s (Ormuzd) nerves; they are 
thrust down to me as pure God's rays whenever the impure ray 
filaments laden with poison of corpses are exhausted. I base 
this conception on the fact that I usually become aware of the 
spots of light together with an auditory impression of cries of 
help. I am forced to assume that the cries of help come from 
these rays or nerves of God being thrust down in a state of 





First Series 


anxiety; because of their purity this impresses the human eye 
as light. I have no doubt that these are the nerves of the upper 
God, for reasons which would lead too far afield here. I even 
believe I have now found a satisfactory explanation of why 
cries of help are only audible to me and not to other people 
(compare Chapter 15 of the Memoirs). It is presumably a phe- 
nomenon like telephoning; the filaments of rays spun out to- 
wards my head act like telephone wires; the weak sound of the 
cries of help coming from an apparently vast distance is re- 
ceived only by me in the same way as telephonic communica- 
tion can only be heard by a person who is on the telephone, but 
not by a third person who is somewhere between the giving 
and the receiving end. 


Vv 
CONCERNING THE NATURE OF GOD 
(MARCH AND APRIL 1901) 


My experiences in the last seven years and the innumerable 
manifestations of the divine gift of miracles on myself and my 
environment, have often made me think about the question 
how one is to imagine the spatial conditions of God's exis- 
tence, if I may so put it. The most important points have 
already been given in Chapter 1 of the Memoirs. From the re- 
marks in the previous paragraph it will be seen that I recently 
gave up the assumption of a special Ormuzd sun, from which I 
previously started (Chapter 7, p. 91). On the other hand, I re- 
tain the conception, at least as a hypothesis, that the light and 
warmth-giving power of the sun and all other fixed stars is not 
their own innate property but is derived in some way from 
God. The analogy with the planets would then, as mentioned, 
have to be made with great caution, for I am absolutely certain 
that God speaks to me through the mediation of the sun and in 


eereal 
227 
ee) 








POSTSCRIPTS 


the same way creates or works miracles through her media- 
tion. One would have to assume the totality of divine rays or 
nerves being either spread over single points of celestial space 
or-—of course still further distant than the remotest celestial 
bodies we can perceive with our most powerful telescopes— 
filling the whole of space. The latter seems to me the more 
probable; it appears almost a postulate both of eternity and of 
that tremendous display of power, which still manifests itself 
at so enormous a distance in creative activity in general and— 
while conditions contrary to the Order of the World prevail— 
in individual living beings by their being influenced by 
miracles. This influence by miracles has become absolutely 
certain fact for me after experiences repeated a thousandfold; 
its truth leaves not the slightest room for doubt. My further re- 
marks on the subject are naturally hypothetical, and I only put 
them on paper so as to provide future generations with further 
food for thought. 

In general I must maintain my previously developed ideas 
of God's incapacity to understand adequately the living human 
being as an organism (Chapters 5, 13 and 20 of the Memoirs} in 
the circumstances contrary to the Order of the World which 
arose from nerve-contact being established with one single 
human being, namely myself. My subsequent experiences con- 
firmed what was said there. God, Who under normal circum- 
stances maintained contact only with souls and with corpses— 
in order to draw up their nerves—completely misunderstands 
the needs of an actually living body and treats me like a soul, 
sometimes like a corpse, and thinks He can force upon me 
the souls’ mode of thinking and feeling, their language, etc., 
and demand from me continual enjoyment or continual think- 
ing, etc., etc. 

This is the basis of the innumerable misunderstandings 
which must be presumed on God's part, and of the almost un- 
bearable mental tortures I have had to endure through the 


Gal 
278 
ae) 





First Series 


years. While God can perceive something through my mediation 
(sharing my visual impressions), while soul-voluptuousness is 
present in my body and affords enjoyment, or while my men- 
tal activity produces thoughts formulated in words, God is to a 
certain extent satisfied. His tendency to withdraw from me is 
then either absent or almost so. The need to withdraw from 
me periodically has only become necessary I must presume be- 
cause of the arrangements contrary to the Order of the World 
which were introduced some years ago (tying-to-celestial- 
bodies, etc.). But continual enjoyment or continual thinking is 
impossible for a human being. As soon therefore as I indulge in 
thinking nothing without simultaneously fostering the culti- 
vation of voluptuousness in the previously mentioned sense, 
withdrawal of the rays accompanied by more or less unpleas- 
ant manifestations at once sets in (painful sensations, attacks 
of bellowing, and noise around me). My eyes are then regularly 
closed by miracle in order to rob me of visual impressions, be- 
cause these would otherwise attract the rays. 

In consequence of the constant increase in soul- 
voluptuousness which makes all “inner voices” cease, the reap- 
proaching of rays now occurs at shorter and shorter intervals 
(frequently only a matter of minutes) depending on which ex- 
ternally organized “system” is involved. States of voluptuous- 
ness then occur, which must lead to sleep when I am in bed; 
but length of sleep according to human needs is by no means 
always afforded. Even now there are nights in which I wake up 
after a short sleep and am exposed to attacks of bellowing. If 
these last some time without my falling asleep again, I natu- 
rally ask myself whether it would not be better to leave the 
bed and occupy myself whether it would not be better to leave 
the bed and occupy myself in some way, perhaps even smoke a 
cigar. What course of action to adopt depends naturally on the 
time. I very much dislike deciding to leave my bed in the mid- 
dle of the night or in the very cold. If daybreak seems near and 


res aa) 
279 
es) 


POSTSCRIPTS 


I think I have had enough sleep, then of course getting up is no 
great sacrifice; under such circumstances I usually feel very 
well out of bed; but naturally, once I am up, I have renounced 
sleep until my return to bed. Getting up can only be achieved 
with acute, at times severe pains; before Christmas these were 
for some time so intense (like lumbago} that I could sit up and 
get out of bed only with the help of an attendant, who at my 
request was sleeping in the adjacent room for a few nights." 
Since God entered into exclusive nerve-contact with me, 


116, (Added June 1901.) While adding these lines, the manifestations have again 
changed. Immediately after leaving bed, signs of paralysis occur in my trunk 
(shoulder-blades, etc.) and in my thighs, which although not particularly painful 
are so severe that for a time I am completely bent and can hardly walk upright. 
These manifestations, like all which are dependent on miracles, are quite tran- 
sient; usually after a few steps I can walk normally again and accomplish quite 
considerable feats of walking during the day; I have of late repeatedly made excur- 
sions including going up the Porsberg, the Barenstein, etc. I regret very much that 
these events are not made the object of detailed scientific observation; anybody 
watching me get up in the morning would undoubtedly think it impossible for the 
same person to be capable of any physical exertion during the day. Yet I can under- 
stand that the doctors, to whom I have repeatedly extended written invitations to 
make observations of the events at my bedside, do not feel the urge to investigate 
more closely. For what would they do if they could not avoid the impression of 
something miraculous occurring with me, incompatible with the usual run of hu- 
man experience? Should they as much as consider the possibility of miracles, they 
would have to fearlaying themselves open to ridicule by their colleagues, by an ir- 
religious press and in general by our age of disbelief in miracles. Besides, one 
would expect them to feel a certain natural reserve when faced with matters 
which appear inexplicable to them; any obligation to closer examination exists 
still less as they can always maintain that if it is really a question of miracles, 
medical science is neither called for nor capable of explaining the nature of such 
phenomena. 

Remarkable things also happened when, since the beginning of this month, I 
started to bathe in the Elbe, first in the basin for non-swimmers, and then yester- 
day (21 June) for the first time in the Elbe itself, which is only for experienced 
swimmers. While bathing in the basin pretty severe signs of paralysis occurred 
several times—but always vanished rapidly; they did not frighten me; they affect 


eral 
280 
(ee 





First Series 


and I thus became the sole human being on whom His interest 
centers, the highly important question arises, whether His ca- 
pacity to see and hear is confined to my person and to what 
happens around me. | dare not answer this question yet, but 
the experiences of the future will most probably afford me reli- 
able indications for a positive or negative answer to this ques- 
tion. It is unquestionable that the light and heat emanating 
from the sun is spread now, as before, over the whole earth; 
but it is by no means impossible that seeing, which is a faculty 
of rays (that is of the totality of God’s nerves} is confined to my 
person and immediate surroundings—like one used to say for 
many years after the 1870 war about the foreign policy of the 
French, that they started at the gap in the Vosges as if hypno- 
tized. The sun herself is not a living or seeing being; but the 
light emanating from her is or was the means by which God 
can perceive all things which happen on earth. In any case mir- 
acles occur only on my person or in my immediate vicinity. I 
have again received striking proof of this in the last few days 
which I think is worth mentioning here. The 16th of March—I 
believe I am not mistaken in the date—was the first day this 
year with a spring-like temperature and bright sunshine. I 
went into the garden in the morning where I now remain only 





only a single extremity and as I am an experienced swimmer I can in case of need 
always swim on my back or make do without an arm ora leg, even without both 
for a short while. In any case I am never fully incapacitated, moving is only more 
difficult. Yesterday while bathing in the open Elbe miracles increased tremen- 
dously my rate of breathing, and caused my whole body to shiver as soon as I sat 
on a floating log; the signs of paralysis were less marked, but again very noticeable 
during later bathes in the open. All these things are subject to constant change and 
will probably become increasingly weaker in future. I know exactly how far I can 
trust myself and I am therefore not afraid to bathe in deep water despite all these 
happenings; but one may imagine that, all the same, peculiar feelings must arise 
in a human being who expects a miracle to be enacted against him at any moment 
while swimming in deep water, making it difficult for him to move. 


esl 
281 
Ee) 


POSTSCRIPTS 


half to three-quarters of an hour, as my stay there usually 
turns into almost uninterrupted bellowing—except when I 
have an opportunity for loud conversation; but this hardly ever 
arises as my environment consists almost entirely of lunatics. 
I was very tired as I had had a poor night; I sat on a bench, and 
started to count (in the nerve-language} 1, 2, 3, 4~-as I always 
do when I am not occupied—in order to drown the incoming 
voices. My eyes were closed by miracles and shortly after sleep 
descended on me. Thereupon a wasp appeared immediately in 
front of my face in order to startle me just as I was going to 
sleep—this event was repeated three times running in my 
short stay (perhaps half an hour) in the garden, during which I 
changed benches. I believe I am justified in stating that these 
were the only wasps present in the garden on that particular 
day, as I saw no others while walking about in between sitting 
down. The wasps were a miracle of the upper God (Ormuzd}, 
as I know from evidence which would take us too far afield 
here; in the previous year they had still been miraculously pro- 
duced by the lower God (Ariman}, while the miracles of the 
upper God were at the time distinctly hostile in character [in- 
citing of lunatics, etc.). The following afternoon several gam- 
boling mosquitoes were similarly produced by miracle in front 
of my face while I sat in the garden of the inn of the neighbor- 
ing village of Ebenheit during an excursion; and again they 
appeared only in my immediate vicinity. 

This morning (19th March}, the same weather conditions 
prevailing as on the 16th of March, I decided to provoke 
the wasp miracle during my walk in the garden. I sat down on 
a bench and the usual happened: first the closing of my eyes 
and then the bellowing-miracle. I for my part counted in si- 
lence and waited for what was going to happen next. But now 
the “interference” was practiced in a different form: while I 
quietly sat on a bench and only occasionally let out the bel- 
lowing sound produced by miracle, a patient approached me 





First Series 


whom I could not possibly have noticed before as my eyes 
were once again closed by miracles. He hit me a pretty smart 
blow on my arm without any provocation; I naturally got 
up and countered his rude action with a few loud words. The 
patient concerned had previously been unknown to me; I 
subsequently discovered his name was G. by asking an atten- 
dant. This small event, though insignificant in itself, may il- 
lustrate also the tremendous demands which throughout the 
years of my stay in the Asylum’s garden have been made on 
my tact and my moderation; for as mentioned earlier (Chapter 
20) such verbal and physical attacks used to be very frequent 
and their deeper cause was always the same: the influence 
of rays. 

I have mentioned in several places that the rays are “essen- 
tially without thought," or that they lack thoughts. This idea 
did not arise in me spontaneously, but rests on statements I re- 
ceived and still receive from the voices themselves; even now 
the hackneyed reeled-off phrases are followed every two min- 
utes by the phrase: “The leading idea is missing.” Something 
real must be at the bottom of this phrase and I think it worth 
while discussing briefly what is meant by it. The rays’ essen- 
tial lack of thoughts is by no means to be taken in the sense 
that God Himself has lost His original wisdom or even that it 
has diminished. If this were the case clearly He would no 
longer be able to initiate decisions in the nerves of human be- 
ings in my environment, nor make them speak by miracle 
about matters within their educational standard, etc.; He 
would no longer be able to direct my gaze by miracle, nor to 
examine me, etc., etc. (compare Chapter 18 of the Memoirs}, all 
of which still occur all the time. 

Therefore I think one can assume that the wisdom which 
from the beginning was God's own is inherent equally and 
to the same extent (but limited in the same way as far as 
the living human being is concerned) in the totality of rays 


POSTSCRIPTS 


when they are a quiescent mass; the idea behind the phrase 
“essentially without thoughts” refers only to rays moving 
towards a single human being—a state contrary to the Order of 
the World arising from my nerves’ power of attraction. I must 
state again that I was never in direct exclusive contact 
with divine rays or nerves, but between myself and God 
there were always so-called intermediary instances whose in- 
fluence had always to be eliminated first before God's pure 
rays could reach me. These were, and in part still are, the 
“tested souls,” which had been very numerous (compare 
Chapter 8 and Chapter 14 of the Memoirs} and those rem- 
nants of the erstwhile “forecourts of heaven” which had been 
spared in order to slow down the attraction; I must assume 
that these are identical with certain nerves of those birds 
which, as “talking birds,” have spoken to me since then with- 
out interruption. 

All these intermediary instances, that is to say the remain- 
der of Professor Flechsig’s tested soul and those remnants of 
the “forecourts of heaven” put into birds’ bodies, have com- 
pletely lost their former intelligence which was equal to, or 
higher than, the human. They have become completely devoid 
of thoughts in a manner comparable to what is called “forget- 
ting” in human beings. For human beings are incapable of re- 
membering for ever all impressions received in life; many 
impressions, particularly the less important, are rapidly lost. 
Something similar (of course immensely magnified) seems to 
happen or have happened with those souls which—instead of 
entering into God, gradually losing their personal memories 
and thus fulfilling their destiny as departed souls according to 
the Order of the World—remained individual souls and flutter 
around independently without merging with God and without 
becoming reunited with the divine intelligence. Such an event 
was not envisaged in the Order of the World and could only 
come about through the circumstances contrary to the Order 


gana) 
284 
(ae) 





First Series 


of the World which had arisen between God and myself. All 
these independent souls melted away to perhaps only one or a 
few nerves, completely lost the capacity to think and appar- 
ently only retained that degree of sensibility which allows 
them to appreciate or enjoy sharing the voluptuousness 
which they meet in my body. They have even lost the capacity 
for independent speech, with the exception of those birds 
which in moments (twinkle of an eye) of sharing the volup- 
tuousness in my body are still capable of the words “cursed 
fellow” or “Oh cursed something’—which proves conclu- 
sively that they are remnants of souls which used to speak the 
basic language. 

I can clearly recognize the genuine feeling expressed in 
these words in contrast to the phrases “drummed into” their 
nerves (compare Chapter 15 of the Memoirs, footnote 92) both 
by their effect—real voices do not cause me pain or any other 
damage but help to increase soul-voluptuousness—and by 
their sound, and particularly by the tempo in which they are 
spoken. The genuine words follow with a rapidity peculiar to 
all nerves and become more distinct from the drummed- 
in phrases as the tempo of the latter slows down. But the 
nerves without thoughts must also speak in order to slow 
down their approach. As they however lack thoughts of their 
own, and as there are no beings with thoughts of their own at 
the places (on stars, celestial bodies) where they are loaded 
with poison of corpses (one may picture these beings which 
are also responsible for the writing-down-system either as hu- 
man shapes like the “fleeting-improvised men,” or in some 
other way) the quiescent totality of divine rays can (when they 
approach} only give them or drum into them to speak what 
they have read as my own undeveloped thoughts (usually by 
falsifying them to their opposite); or remarks about the mira- 
cles to be enacted on me; or one has to fall back on the writing- 
down-material (representing essentially my own thoughts}; or 


Inet 
285 
(tay) 


POSTSCRIPTS 


finally when all else has been reeled off and one only meets 
the not-thinking-thought in me, one resorts to the ultimate 
phrase: “The leading idea is missing,” to which is added "Why 
do you not say it,” namely “aloud,” etc., etc. This is the rough 
picture I formed of the thousandfold repetition of the rays 
“being-essentially-without-thoughts”; naturally one is only 
dealing with suppositions, because full insight into the true 
state of affairs is beyond human capacity here as in all super- 
natural matters; but I think what I have said gives a fairly ac- 
curate picture. 

I have other reasons for believing that God Himself, or in 
other words the totality of quiescent rays, retained a superior 
intelligence, probably a wisdom vastly exceeding all human in- 
telligence. This is evidenced by a number of the phrases, not 
genuine but “learnt by rote” or “crammed in,” used by the 
lower God (Ariman] (mentioned in Chapter 13 and Chapter 21 
of the Memoirs: “It is hoped that voluptuousness has reached a 
certain degree”; “The lasting results are on the side of the hu- 
man being”; “All nonsense cancels itself out”; “Excite yourself 
sexually”; “Voluptuousness has become God-fearing,” etc., 
etc.).''’ I must admit that only years later did I recognize the 
truth of these sentences; at first I was skeptical of some of 
them, for instance a phrase of the lower God years ago (in 1894 
or 1895) meant to direct my behavior and repeated frequently: 
"The motto must be ‘as far as I am concerned.’” It meant that 
I was to stop worrying about the future and—trusting in 
eternity—quietly leave my personal fate to the natural devel- 
opment of things. But at the time I could not accept the advice 
to brush all my experiences aside with a carefree “as far as 1 am 


117. These forms of speech by the way are now no longer used by the voices; by 
continual repetition they became a kind of “not-thinking-of-anything-thought” 
and thus they were no longer able to slow down the attraction. But because I re- 
member them I sometimes call them purposely to mind. 


eel 
286 
a) 





First Series 


concerned”; from a human point of view I must add, this was 
understandable. 

The miracles menacing my mind and my body at that time 
were too terrifying, the damage wrought on my body too 
terrible (compare Chapter 11 of the Memoirs) for me to feel un- 
concerned about my future. Every human being when in dan- 
ger of his life, is concerned for the future. But in the course of 
time I got used to them, this, coupled with the salient point, 
namely that I had no need to fear for my reason, allowed me to 
make “as far as I am concerned” my motto, and regard the fu- 
ture in this spirit. Even now things are unpleasant at times: 
some days and nights I can hardly endure because of attacks of 
bellowing, mental torture caused by the chatter of voices, and 
bodily pain. These reverses are always of short duration; they 
are instituted to counteract increased soul-voluptuousness 
and are due to the “systems” used against me being made 
more severe. When soul-voluptuousness is found greatly in- 
creased in my body, one attempts to slow down the attraction, 
to withdraw to greater distances and so prevent the union 
of all rays which lead to voluptuousness or sleep. To achieve 
this the “systems” used against me are more rigorously ap- 
plied regarding the distribution of the talking voices and ray 
filaments, the content of the voices’ talk, etc. This effect, 
however, never lasts; increased soul-voluptuousness soon tri- 
umphs and a more agreeable bodily and mental state follows 
for a time. What I said about the slogan “as far as I am 
concerned” applies equally to the other sentence “all nonsense 
cancels itself.” When I heard this sentence from the voices 
many years ago—I have not heard it lately—I could not be- 
lieve it. I remembered that in history nonsense did in fact 
rule individuals and whole nations for long periods of time, 
and led to catastrophes which could afterwards not always be 
made good. Nevertheless experience of several years has con- 
vinced me of its truth. A human being who in a certain sense 


ee Sa 
287 











POSTSCRIPTS 


can say that eternity is in his service, can afford to ignore all 
nonsense in the certain knowledge that ultimately a time 
must come when nonsense exhausts itself and a sensible state 
of affairs returns. 

I have discussed these phrases at length because they are of 
great value as proof that superior divine wisdom years ago 
recognized certain truths in this (as in many other matters) 
which only became clear to me much later. I find it extremely 
difficult to reconcile this superior wisdom with the ignor- 
ance shown in other directions, such as the completely absurd 
{as the outcome shows) policy pursued against me, etc.'® 
This question has exercised my mind for years almost without 
a break, yet I must admit that I will never find a complete 
solution and that it will always remain a mystery. For I must 
reaffirm that God does not know the living human being in 
the circumstances contrary to the Order of the World which 
have arisen between Him and myself. He must, earlier at 
least, have thought it possible to destroy my reason or make 
me demented. He may have started with the mistaken idea 
that in any case He was dealing with an already almost de- 
mented, perhaps also morally unworthy person; this idea may 
at the same time have served to silence His scruples about pur- 
suing such a policy against me. Such misjudgment of my men- 
tal and moral state was possible in former years, probably 
because withdrawal and drawing nearer occurred only at 
longish intervals. 

These periods have become very much shorter owing to 
rapid increase of soul-voluptuousness; ignorance apparently 
soon gives way to better insight. Yet it appears that souls have 
an irresistible tendency to withdraw if they do not find in my 





118. Its absurdity was recognized by the lower God {Ariman] himself (as men- 
tioned in Chapter 13 of the Memoirs) with the phrase: “These are the results of 
the famous soul-policy.” 


co 
288 





First Series 


body that enjoyment (Blessedness)—if only momentarily— 
which is the soul’s form of existence within the Order of the 
World; or perhaps they are forced to withdraw, because a state 
of affairs contrary to the Order of the World was instituted. 
One might have realized that withdrawal would not be suc- 
cessful in the long run, but that an approach had to follow 
with the rays being thrust down to me with cries of “help,” 
that is to say in a state of anxiety. 

This phenomenon can only be explained by the character 
of souls being completely different from that of human 
beings. Manly contempt of death, as expected of men in cer- 
tain circumstances such as soldiers and especially officers 
in war-time, is not in the souls’ nature. In this respect they 
are like little children who cannot forego their sweets— 
soul-voluptuousness—for even a moment. At least this seems 
to be true of those rays on whom, as the most closely con- 
cerned, the decision to withdraw rests. Hence, since the 
miracles have largely lost their earlier terrifying effect, God 
appears in almost everything that happens to me ridiculous 
or even childish. Iam consequently often forced in self-defense 
to mock God with a loud voice; I simply have to do this at 
times to convince that distant place which tortures me so 
often unbearably with attacks of bellowing, with nonsensical 
twaddle of voices, etc., that one is not dealing with a dement, 
but with a human being in full command of the situation. But 
I must stress again that all this is only an episode which I trust 
will come to an end at the latest with my death; in other words 
that only I, and no other human being, have the right to mock 
God. For other human beings God remains the Almighty 
Creator of heaven and earth, the ultimate cause of all things 
and their future salvation, Who should be worshiped and 
highly revered—even if a few traditional religious beliefs do 
need modification. 


POSTSCRIPTS 


VI 
CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT THE FUTURE: 
MISCELLANEOUS 
(APRIL AND MAY 1901} 


What I said in Chapter 22 of the Memoirs about a satisfaction 
which awaits me, or a reward I may expect for the pains and 
privations I have suffered, assumes a more and more concrete 
form according to new observations. Even now, a few months 
later, I believe I can say more about the nature of the reward. 
At present, however, my life is an extraordinary mixture of 
states of voluptuousness, painful sensations and other annoy- 
ances, among which I count, besides bellowing, the stupen- 
dous noise frequently made around me. Every word spoken to 
me in conversation is still combined with a blow against my 
head; the pain it causes is sometimes pretty severe when the 
rays have withdrawn to too great a distance. This can be very 
exhausting, particularly after bad sleepless nights; it is worse 
still when other pains are simultaneously caused by miracles, 
for instance toothache. 

On the other hand there are periods every day, when I 
float in voluptuousness so to speak, i.e. when an indescribable 
feeling of well-being corresponding to feminine feelings of 
voluptuousness pervades my whole body. It is by no means al- 
ways necessary to let my imagination play on sexual matters; 
on other occasions too, like reading a particularly moving part 
of a poem, playing a piece of music on the piano which partic- 
ularly pleases me aesthetically, or enjoying nature during an 
excursion into the country, the state of well-being which is 
based on soul-voluptuousness creates moments when, as I may 
truly say, I experience a kind of foretaste of Blessedness. At 
present these feelings are only short-lived: at the very moment 
of the height of voluptuousness, headache or toothache is pro- 
duced by miracle to prevent fully developed voluptuousness, 


First Series 


which irresistibly attracts the rays. How the whole person 
feels in such a state is difficult to describe; at times I enjoy 
the highest voluptuousness up to my neck, while my head is 
in a bad way. 

I think, however, I can prophesy that in the future the 
painful sensations will diminish and states of voluptuousness 
or Blessedness prevail. Soul-voluptuousness increases steadily, 
hence rays entering my body have more and more the impres- 
sion of voluptuousness; even now one is increasingly unsuc- 
cessful in inflicting pain on my body as a means of reducing 
voluptuousness. The intention however remains, as I gather 
from what the voices simultaneously say, that one intends to 
“affect my eyes by miracles,” i.e. inject the poison of corpses 
into them, or produce toothache, that is to say unload the poi- 
son of corpses into my teeth, etc.; but lately the rays have less 
and less often reached those parts of my body, while the in- 
duced feeling of voluptuousness in other parts of my body pre- 
vails; the poison of corpses meant for my eyes or my teeth is 
then unloaded without any harm on some other part of my 
body, perhaps on my bosom or on my arms. From all this I be- 
lieve I can predict for the not too distant future that in my life- 
time I will enjoy in advance that Blessedness granted to other 
human beings only after death. This state of Blessedness is 
mainly a state of voluptuous enjoyment, which for its full de- 
velopment needs the fantasy of either being or wishing to be a 
female being, which naturally is not to my taste. I must how- 
ever submit to the necessity of the Order of the World which 
forces me to accept these ideas, if my bodily state is not to be 
made unbearable by pains, by bellowing produced by miracle, 
and by insane noise.'"** A substitute of the highest significance 
for the loss of opportunities of using my mental powers in 
other ways in the service of mankind and thereby achieving 


118A. I would have to modify this to a certain extent now. 

















POSTSCRIPTS 


honor or fame in the eyes of men, is the knowledge of God 
and divine matters I have gained through the continuous con- 
tact with divine rays. With it I harbor the hope that I will 
be the middleman, through whose personal fate the knowledge 
I have gained will spread fruitfully far and wide, and that in 
this way it will be granted me to help mankind to correct 
views about the relationship between God and the world, and 
the revelation of religious truths and salvation, even long after 
my death. 

How all this will work out when I die—and this must 
be expected to happen sometime—I naturally cannot say. 
According to the views expressed in Chapter 22 of the 
Memoirs I think I could only die from senility. I harbor the 
wish that when my last hour finally strikes I will no longer 
find myself in an Asylum, but in orderly domestic life sur- 
rounded by near relatives, as I may need more loving care than 
I could get in an Asylum. I also consider it likely one will 
be able to observe some extraordinary phenomena at my sick- 
or death-bed, and I therefore express the wish that men of 
science from various branches of human knowledge will be 
given the opportunity to attend; perhaps they will be able to 
draw important conclusions concerning the truth of my reli- 
gious ideas. At the moment I am still far from my aim of 
being released; the decision of the Lower Court placing me 
under tutelage as mentioned in Chapter 20 of the Memoirs has 
been confirmed (by the judgment of the District Court 
at Dresden of 15th April 1901). I still do not know the grounds 
on which this judgment is based and therefore cannot say 
whether I will proceed by appealing to a Higher Court; in 
any case I am absolutely certain that I will achieve the suspen- 
sion of my tutelage and with it my discharge from this 
Asylum, if not in the immediate future then in the course of a 
few years. 

I will add a few remarks not directly related to the foregoing 


Rare 
292 
Lee, 





First Series 


and only put in here because they are too short for a separate 
chapter. 


Stimulated by the supernatural impressions which I received, I 
have thought a good deal about folklore and superstition in the 
course of the years. These and the mythology of earlier peoples 
now appear to me in a quite different light. I think that there is 
a grain of truth in most folklore, some presentiment of super- 
natural matters which in the course of time dawned on a large 
number of people, naturally much augmented by deliberate 
elaboration of men’s fantasy, so that the grain of truth can now 
hardly be shelled out. Had I sufficient literary resources at my 
disposal, I might attempt to investigate a number of items of 
folklore from this point of view. 

Lacking such help I will confine myself to two examples. 
Well known is the superstition of ghosts stalking the midnight 
hour, which is the spirits’ only opportunity for communion 
with human beings and which forces them to return to their 
graves at the stroke of one. In my opinion this superstition is 
based on the correct belief that dreams are not always only 
vibrations of a sleeping person's nerves uninfluenced from out- 
side, but under certain circumstances are caused by commun- 
ion with departed souls (nerve-contact, preferably made by a 
dead relative, see Chapter 1 of the Memoirs). The hour after 
midnight as the time of deepest sleep is therefore with some 
justification taken as the most favorable time for such inter- 
course. As a second example I will mention the idea which is 
bound up with the phrase that the devil can crawl through a 
keyhole. In my opinion this belief is correctly based on the fact 
that no mechanical obstacle made by man can prevent the en- 
try of the rays. I experience at every moment on my own body 
that this is so; no wall however thick, no closed window can 





POSTSCRIPTS 


prevent the ray filaments penetrating in a way incomprehensi- 
ble to man and so reaching any part of my body, particularly 
my head. 


In case this book should reach publication, I am well aware 
that there is one person who could feel hurt by it. It is Professor 
Flechsig in Leipzig. I have already discussed this in detail in a 
memorandum of 4th February 1901 of this year to the Director 
of this Asylum, the wording of which I reproduce here: 


“It is known to the Director of the Asylum that I am 
thinking of publishing my Memoirs and hope to do this 
after the order placing me under tutelage is rescinded. 

For a long time I was in doubt whether publication 
was permissible. I am fully aware that with respect to 
certain sections of my Memoirs Professor Flechsig in 
Leipzig could feel urged to prosecute me for libel or even 
demand the withdrawal from circulation of the whole 
book as constituting a punishable offense (§§40, Str.G.B.). 
Nevertheless I have at last decided to proceed with 
publication. 

I know I am free from any personal animosity against 
Professor Flechsig. I have therefore only mentioned 
such matters concerning him in my Memoirs, which 
in my opinion are essential for understanding my thesis. 
I might erase the perhaps somewhat offensive and 
unessential footnote (erased) of my Memoirs in case 
of publication. I hope that Professor Flechsig’s scientific 
interest in the content of my Memoirs will outweigh 
possible personal susceptibilities. If this should not be 
the case, the importance I place on the publication of 
my work, in the hope of thereby enriching science and 





First Series 


clarifying religious views, is so great that I would run the 
risk of prosecution for libel and the threatened financial 
loss in case of a possible withdrawal of my book from 
circulation. 

I do not make this communication to the Director of 
the Asylum to obtain an opinion whether a penalty is 
considered possible, but only to furnish new proof once 
again of how carefully I consider the consequences of 
any of my actions in advance, and so to demonstrate 
how little one is justified in maintaining that I am inca- 
pable of managing my affairs. 


SONNENSTEIN, 4TH FEBRUARY, 1901. 


Your most obedient servant, 
(signed) 


I wish to add a few more remarks. 

I have to presume Professor Flechsig must retain at least 
some recollection of the external events connected with my 
stay at the University Nerve Clinic in Leipzig of which he is 
the Director. I dare not say that he himself has ever become 
aware of the supernatural things with which his name is con- 
nected; the voices mentioned and still daily mention his name 
in this connection—despite my personal relations with Pro- 
fessor Flechsig having long receded into the background, so 
that any continued interest on my part could only be aroused 
from outside. I have admitted the possibility that in his capac- 
ity as ahuman being he was and still is aloof from these events; 
but it remains mysterious how, while a human being is still 
living, his soul can have a separate existence outside his body. 
That such a soul or at least part of such a soul existed and still 
exists, is nevertheless certain from my many direct observa- 
tions. I must therefore recognize the possibility that what I 


295 
LL 


POSTSCRIPTS 


reported in the first part of my Memoirs in connection with 
the name Flechsig, refers only to Flechsig’s soul as distinct 
from the living human being Flechsig; its separate existence is 
certain but cannot be explained in a natural way. It will be ap- 
preciated that I do not wish in any way to attack the honor of 
the living Professor Flechsig in my intended publication.''® 


VII 
CONCERNING CREMATION 
{MAY 1901} 


The organized movement for cremation which has become 
pretty lively lately, started certain thoughts in me which 
might be of interest to others. The objections raised by devout 
religious people against this way of dealing with bodies de- 
serve most serious consideration in my opinion, for one may 
ask whether the person submitting his body to cremation 
thereby renounces a reawakening in the life beyond or deprives 
himself of the attainment of Blessedness."* Not even the soul is 
purely spiritual, but rests on a material substrate, the nerves. 
Therefore if the nerves are totally destroyed by cremation the 





118B. Besides repeatedly revising my work after the termination of the proceed- 
ings regarding my tutelage, I cut out, altered and tried to tone down my expres- 
sions so much that I believe the question of insulting content no longer arises. I 
trust I have thus removedeverything which in the medical expert's reports, in the 
judgments of the First and Second Instances and in my own written presentations 
to the Court was thought could possibly lead to prosecution. 


119. That a continued existence after death or a state of Blessedness exists in the 
Order of the World seems to me absolutely beyond doubt [compare particularly 
Chapter 1 of the Memoirs). This is naturally not contradicted by the fact that as 
long as the circumstances contrary to World Order persist in the relation between 
God and my person, the founding of new states of Blessedness is suspended (com- 
pare end of Chapter 2 and end of Chapter 5 of the Memoirs). 


aya) 
296 
La ek 





First Series 


ascension of the soul to a state of Blessedness would be pre- 
cluded. As a layman in the physiology of nerves I cannot state 
definitely whether this premise is true. But I am certain that 
this question is quite different from cases where a human be- 
ing died by burning through accidental fires, or in the Middle 
Ages by the burning of heretics and witches. Death by fire 
under such circumstances is probably largely death by as- 
phyxia, and one can hardly speak of a total destruction of the 
body; even the soft parts are probably mostly only charred; 
certainly a total destruction of bones and nerve endings within 
them (particularly in the skull} does not take place. These 
cases are therefore hardly comparable to modern cremation, 
where in special crematoria by means of excessive heat, cut- 
ting off atmospheric air, etc., total destruction is methodically 
aimed at and probably achieved, so that nothing remains of the 
human being after death but a small heap of ashes. It is at least 
probable that in this process a physiological or chemical 
change takes place in the nerves which precludes their reawak- 
ening in the life beyond. 

In view of this the advantages of cremation from the aes- 
thetic, sanitary, or economic points of view which are often 
stressed must in my opinion recede far into the background. 
Even the last-named advantage is a most precarious one; par- 
ticularly the intended gain by saving cemeteries, etc., would 
probably be canceled out by the tremendous costs of crema- 
tion—if one thinks in terms of the custom becoming general. 
It is not likely that the majority of people would give up the 
old custom of burial for centuries to come. It is also very un- 
likely that the time will come when every small village or 
every small district has its own crematorium. However, the 
morally decisive question will always remain: whether mod- 
ern cremation is compatible with the hope of a future state of 
Blessedness. 

I know well that many people are tempted to gloss over this 


4 
297 
ei 


POSTSCRIPTS 


question with indifference. It is not always only a matter of 
unbelief, of deliberate adherence to atheism. Repugnance to 
the idea of a person's body decomposing after death in some 
people overrides every other consideration; hazy notions about 
the nature of the new existence to be expected in the life 
beyond not infrequently cause, particularly in pessimistic 
people, a mood in which they talk themselves and others into 
being unconcerned about a life after death; as if they were 
quite happy for death to bring everything to an end, and for all 
traces of them to vanish utterly so as not to remain behind as 
objects of diminished interest for other people. But I believe I 
am not far wrong in supposing that such moods never last 
longer than till such time as the terrors of actual death come 
tangibly near. Some consolation and hope are essential for a 
human being who, perhaps subject to a long and painful ill- 
ness, is faced with the certainty of impending death; terrible 
may be the sufferings of a dying person who thinks he has 
deprived himself of every hope because of his attitude to reli- 
gious matters, and thereby excluded himself from the consola- 
tions of religion. In the case of a person who has arranged for 
cremation, the torturing doubt may be added whether he him- 
self has not contributed to the loss of all hope. Happy the man 
I would exclaim, who in such circumstances is still able to 
cancel his cremation, which he may have arranged in a care- 
free mood while in good health! 

Whether the clergy should be allowed to give the Church's 
blessing at a cremation or speak a few words of comfort out of 
consideration for the sorrowing mourners, will be answered 
differently according to individual feeling. But there can be no 
doubt that the position of the faithful clergyman in such cir- 
cumstances is extremely difficult. He cannot help feeling that 
the person who ordered the cremation showed by his decision 
a gross indifference in a matter important for the question of 
continued existence after death; furthermore probably all cler- 





First Series 


gymen will appreciate the doubts I have raised whether a state 
of Blessedness is possible at all after total destruction of the 
nerves. 

One must not be deceived by the objection that it is incom- 
patible with the idea of God’s omnipotence to believe that cre- 
mation could influence the possibility of resurrection after 
death. God’s omnipotence is not absolute and without limita- 
tion; for instance God cannot achieve the same degree of 
Blessedness for a child’s soul or the soul of ahuman being sunk 
in sin, as He can for the soul of a mature man of an intellectual 
significance equivalent to that of our great men of art and sci- 
ence, or for the soul of a morally worthy man. Therefore the 
possibility remains that a human being, by his own doing, can 
exclude himself from the possibility of resurrection after 
death, such as would be his due within the Order of the World. 
Human freedom of will is here as elsewhere not limited by 
God’s omnipotence (compare Chapter 19 of the Memoirs]; hu- 
man beings can use this freedom of will to achieve results 
which not even God can reverse. 


eo 
299 
a acel 


OcTOBER 1902 


SECOND SERIES 


THERE 1S LITTLE toadd to the foregoing. 

My outward circumstances, the rescinding of the order of 
my tutelage and my impending discharge from this Asylum, 
have been discussed in the Preface. I note with satisfaction 
that my prediction at the beginning of Chapter 22 of the 
Memoirs was confirmed shortly afterwards. 

Miracles and the talking of voices continue as before. The 
slowing down of the voices has progressed further so that 
the words are hardly understandable (Chapter 16 of the Mem- 
oirs and Postscript No. IV}; but the voices are still continuous, 
as noted in No. IV of the Postscripts. The miracles continue to 
take on a more and more harmless character. Only occasion- 
ally, particularly when I am in bed, severe cramp and paralysis 
occur especially in the lower extremities and back; they are in- 
tended to hinder me from getting up or changing my position 
in bed; or for the same purpose acute pain in the bones particu- 
larly of the lower legs. But I still suffer frequently (several 
times a day) from tearing headaches which come and go with 


4 
300 





Second Series 


every withdrawal of the rays; they have already been described 
in Postscript No. IV, and are still sometimes so intense as 
to make consecutive reading or similar activities impossible. 
The sensation of temporary thinning and furrowing of the 
bony substance of my skull persists, and can hardly be only 
subjective. Sleep is almost normal considering my age; on the 
whole I sleep quite satisfactorily, mostly without artificial 
sleeping drugs. 

The attacks of bellowing, although not completely gone, 
are less severe, particularly because I learnt to counteract 
them successfully when they might be a serious nuisance to 
other people. Apart from reciting poems it is apparently suffi- 
cient simply to count in the nerve-language in order to con- 
vince God of His erroneous idea that He is dealing with a 
person deprived of his ability to think, i.e. who is demented. 
Therefore bellowing does not occur as long as I count continu- 
ously. This is particularly important at night because with bel- 
lowing precluded by counting I usually achieve sleep, and 
when I do waken I soon fall asleep again. This success cannot 
always be achieved. It is not easy for a human being to count 
for hours. Therefore even if by counting continually for some 
time I cannot fall asleep and I stop counting, at that very 
moment the bellowing-miracle commences and when fre- 
quently repeated in bed becomes unbearable. Although much 
more rarely, I must still sometimes leave my bed and carry on 
some occupation to demonstrate that I am a thinking person. 
By continual counting I can also prevent bellowing almost 
completely in public places, in the theater, in an educated 
environment, etc., or during pauses when not carrying on a 
conversation aloud. I may have to make some little noise 
like coughing, clearing the throat or yawning somewhat ill- 
manneredly, none of which is likely to give particular offense. 
But while going for walks along country roads, through open 
fields, etc., I make things easy for myself when no one else is 


PFOVSET-SuGiRoWRE TES 


about. I simply let the bellowing happen; sometimes it contin- 
ues for five or ten minutes almost without interruption, during 
which time I feel physically perfectly well. If it gets too bad I 
speak a few words out aloud, even when alone, preferably 
about God, eternity, etc., in order to convince God of the error 
of His oft-mentioned idea. A witness of such bouts of almost 
continuous bellowing would however hardly be able to under- 
stand the connection and might really think he is seeing a 
madman. Although I carefully watch whether people are about 
in such circumstances, I am really unconcerned, because I 
know that at any time one single word spoken aloud would be 
sufficient to prove my complete mental clarity. 

It has already been mentioned that the miracles concerned 
with damaging my body are increasingly harmless; frequently 
only a kind of practical joke is played with the things I most 
commonly use. But my bodily condition is not even now al- 
ways an enviable one; the tearing headache caused by the 
withdrawal of the rays, the unceasing talk of voices causing 
mental unrest, accelerated breathing, miraculously produced 
tremors, palpitation, etc., make a quiet occupation at times ex- 
traordinarily difficult. However, nothing I suffer now is worth 
mentioning in comparison with the destruction carried out on 
my body in the first years of my illness (compare the account 
given in Chapter 11 of the Memoirs). 

All the same this development of things causes contradic- 
tory feelings in me. Whereas of course I can only welcome feel- 
ing incomparably better personally, yet I realize that the 
prospect of convincing other people of the reality of the mira- 
cles becomes fainter, the less the miracles leave externally per- 
ceptible traces. The latter point of view is almost as important 
for me as the former, because I can only see a real purpose in 
my life if I succeed in putting forward the truth of my so-called 
delusions, so that other people will be convinced and mankind 
gain a truer insight into the nature of God. 


eo 


3) 





Second Series 


During the first years of my illness it would in my opinion 
have been an easy matter by a thorough examination of my 
body with the help of medical instruments and above all with 
Roentgen-Rays (not then discovered) to demonstrate the most 
obvious changes in my body, particularly the injuries to my in- 
ternal organs which in other human beings would have been 
fatal. This would be much more difficult now. If it were possi- 
ble to make a photographic record of the events in my head, of 
the lambent movements of the rays coming from the horizon, 
sometimes very slowly, sometimes—when from a tremendous 
distance—incredibly swiftly, then the observer would defi- 
nitely lose all doubt about my intercourse with God. But un- 
fortunately human technique has not yet the necessary 
apparatus for investigating such sensations objectively. I am 
certain that this is not only a question of pathological phe- 
nomena—of tremendous inner excitement of the apperceiving 
brain apparatus, as Dr. Weber expresses it in his report of 5th 
April 1902; particularly the divine cries of “help” (Chapter 2 
and Chapter 15 of the Memoirs and the end of Postscript No. 
IV) which I hear absolutely clearly hundreds of times every day 
at short intervals, cannot possibly be hallucinations. Further- 
more, not only the visual and auditory hallucinations, but also 
events occurring in my environment on lifeless objects, on 
other human beings and animals, make me certain of the spe- 
cial relationship in which I stand to God. I can clearly distin- 
guish how far other people’s actions do or do not rest on 
miracles. The latter have been of course more numerous re- 
cently since I have been more in contact with other people; but 
the former—those resting on miracles—still number hundreds 
every day. I can recognize them quite definitely: 


(1) by the pulling, jerky sensation, sometimes combined 


with severe pain which I feel in my head; 
(2) by my gaze being directed (Chapter 18 of the Memoirs, 


r 
303 
Ll 


POSTSCRIPTS 


footnote 100), consisting of my eyes regularly being turned to 
the spot at which such action takes place; 

(3) by the examining question “has been recorded” which 
regularly goes with it (compare Chapter 18 of the Memoirs}, by 
which one tries to ascertain whether I still comprehend the ex- 
pressions used (particularly such as indicate a higher educa- 
tional level or belong to foreign languages, etc.). 


To me therefore it is unshakable truth, that God reveals 
Himself anew daily and hourly through the talking of voices 
and the miracles.'” 

Even if I have therefore to admit that the chance of objec- 
tively demonstrating the miracles and my contact with God 
has not improved with the years, I hope nevertheless that 
enough remains to afford definite clues in a future scientific 
examination. In general I want to refer to my exposition in the 
proceedings before the Country Court in my appeal against the 
judgment of the District Court, an excerpt of which I will 
therefore insert as Addendum C. Apart from what the future 


120. I need hardly say that “to reveal” is here used in a sense somewhat different 
from its ordinary meaning. Usually when one speaks of divine revelations in reli- 
gious tradition, one thinks of God manifesting Himself deliberately to certain hu- 
man beings chosen by Him especially to teach divine matters and to spread the 
insight thus gained among mankind. This is not so in my case. God does not re- 
veal Himself to me deliberately; the knowledge of His existence and His powers 
declares itself to me independent of His will and for no particular purpose 
through miracles which He enacts on me and through the voices in which He 
speaks to me. It is true that in the first years of my contact with God some infor- 
mation was imparted to me (partly in words, partly in the form of visions) appar- 
ently serving as instruction, but mainly to give me directives for my own behavior 
{compare Chapter 13 of the Memoirs]. For some years such didactic communica- 
tions have almost completely ceased; only very occasionally are there vision-like 
events in dreams which give the impression of a purposeful instruction. But I can- 
not decide whether this is actually the case or whether it is only due to my nerves 


playing on me. 





Second Series 


may bring, I again stress the following as characteristic signs 
hardly capable of a natural explanation: 


(1} the attacks of bellowing very different from the noisy 
outbursts of catatonic patients. Among paranoiacs—to which 
category I am supposed to belong—they seem to be very un- 
usual: Dr. Weber, in his report of 5th April 1902, could only 
mention one single case where apparently something similar 
was observed in a paranoiac; 

(2) the closing of my eyes by miracles and their subsequent 
opening for a single moment (at sight); of which it would be 
easy to determine that neither my own will nor weakness of 
my muscles is in any way concerned; 

(3) the quite abnormal and apparently completely motive- 
less acceleration of breathing which occurs even when I am 
perfectly quiet, lying in bed or on the couch, etc.; 

(4) the presence of nerves of voluptuousness over my whole 
body which I must maintain are present despite contradictory 
statements in Dr. Weber's report of 5th April 1902, as the 
subjective feelings caused by them—particularly when softly 
pressed—belong to the most definite experiences which I have 
daily and hourly, and as the periodic swelling of my bosom 
could hardly be missed by a thorough examination. At regular 
intervals, that is to say at every reapproach of the rays which 
leads to their union, voluptuousness streams so mightily into 
me, that my mouth is filled with a sweet taste; while lying in 
bed it would require a very special effort on my part to ward off 
this feeling of voluptuousness, as it would in a female person 
expecting an embrace. 


Of happenings to inanimate objects I only wish to refer 
again to two: the snapping of my piano strings and what hap- 
pens to my musical instrument (symphonion). 

Snapping of piano strings is not as frequent as before, 


(Fined 
305 
ee) 


P2008: TS -CReCP TS 


but happened nevertheless at least half a dozen times every 
year. That the reason cannot lie in “my careless treatment of 
the instrument,” as Dr. Weber in his report of Sth April 1902 
suggests, seems perfectly obvious. One may compare my pre- 
vious discussions in Chapter 12 of the Memoirs and number I 
of my grounds of appeal (Addendum C)}. What I said there 
about the impossibility of piano strings snapping through 
heavy hitting on the keys will, I believe, be credited by every 
expert. 

I bought the above-mentioned symphonion and simple mu- 
sical clocks, mouth organs and sucklike in order to drown the 
talk of the voices which was sometimes hard to bear, and so 
procure at least temporary rest. As often as I use the sympho- 
nion it becomes the object of miracles and so-called “interfer- 
ences” (compare Chapter 10 of the Memoirs) are practiced on 
it and extra sounds, buzzing noises and repeated heavy knock- 
ing are produced in the instrument. 

I frequently took the opportunity to let the doctors and cler- 
gymen of the Asylum witness these events. They cannot be 
due to a peculiarity of my own musical instrument because ex- 
actly the same happens to musical machines in restaurants, 
etc., when these are wound up in my presence by third persons 
or I set them in motion myself by inserting a coin. Unfortu- 
nately I am almost always alone when I go for walks, and not 
accompanied by a scientifically trained observer; I could fre- 
quently have convinced such a person of the correctness of my 
statement. Yet I would not like to say definitely whether these 
miracles on musical machines will be observable in the future, 
because the objects of the miracles continually change. Never- 
theless I hope that in future there will be occasion to prove 
the striking events on my symphonion and other musical in- 
struments. The (simple) musical clock which I previously used 
was by the way long ago made unusable by miracles; its defec- 
tive condition can still be seen. 





Second Series 


I can dono more than offer my person as object of scientific 
observation for the judgment of experts. My main motive in 
publishing this book is to invite this. Short of this I can only 
hope that at some future time such peculiarities of my nervous 
system will be discovered by dissection of my body, which 
will provide stringent proof. I am informed that it is extremely 
difficult to make such observations on the living body. 


Finally a few more remarks about God’s egoism, which I men- 
tioned in different places in the Memoirs (compare end of 
Chapter 5, Chapter 10, footnote 66). I have no doubt that God, 
in His relation to me, is ruled by egoism. This might be calcu- 
lated to confuse religious feelings as God Himself would then 
not be the ideal Being of absolute love and morality, as most 
religions imagine. But, considered in the right light, this does 
not detract from God's grandeur and sublimity, which are in- 
trinsically His and which must be faithfully acknowledged by 
all human beings. 

Egoism, particularly in the form of the instinct of self- 
preservation, which at times demands the sacrifice of other 
beings for one’s own existence, is a necessary quality of all 
living beings; individuals cannot do without it, if they are 
not themselves to perish; in itself it therefore does not appear 
reprehensible. God is a living Being and would Himself have 
to be ruled by egoistic motives, if other living beings existed 
who could endanger Him or in some way be detrimental 
to His interests. In circumstances in accordance with the 
Order of the World there could not be, nor indeed were there, 
such beings next to God; this is the only reason why the ques- 
tion of God’s egoism could not arise as long as these circum- 
stances remained in unadulterated purity. But in my case 
different circumstances have set in as an exception; since God 


Fe eal 
307 
Eee 


POSTSCRIPTS 


by tolerating tested souls—probably in connection with occur- 
rences of a soul-murder-like character—had tied Himself to a 
single human being by whom He had to let Himself be at- 
tracted, albeit unwillingly, the conditions for egoistic actions 
were given. These egoistic actions have been practiced against 
me for years with the utmost cruelty and disregard as only a 
beast deals with its prey. But success could not be permanent, 
because God brought Himself into conflict with the Order of 
the World, that is to say into conflict with His own Being and 
His own powers (compare Chapter 5 of the Memoirs, footnote 
35). Consequently, as I firmly believe, this irregular state of af- 
fairs will be finally liquidated at my death at the latest. In 
the meantime I find immense consolation and encouragement 
in the knowledge that God’s hostile opposition to me contin- 
ues to lose in virulence and the struggle against me becomes 
increasingly conciliatory, perhaps finally to end in complete 
solidarity. This (as already mentioned in Chapter 13 of the 
Memoirs) is the natural sequel of the steadily increasing 
soul-voluptuousness of my body. Soul-voluptuousness lessens 
the antipathy to being attracted; this is because one regains 
in my body after a short interval, that which had to be 
relinquished owing to the attraction: namely the state of 
Blessedness or soul-voluptuousness, in other words complete 
well-being of the nerves condemned to find their end in my 
body. This also shortens the periodicity of drawing nearer and 
appears to me to allow God to recognize at ever-shorter in- 
tervals that “forsaking me,” “destruction of my reason,” etc., 
must come to nothing; therefore eventually it is only a 
question of making life as bearable as possible for both parties 
in the emergency which has arisen because of attraction. I my- 
self have never been an adversary of God, even if from time to 
time I had to mock God aloud for reasons given; it would be 
absurd for a human who once acknowledged God to say such a 
thing of himself. 


Ge 
308 
[Esvee) 





Second Series 


The whole development therefore appears as a glorious 
triumph for the Order of the World, in which I think I can as- 
cribe to myself a modest part. If anywhere, then the beautiful 
sentence applies to the Order of the World, that all legitimate 
interests are in harmony. 


é 
309 


APPENDIX 








“In what circumstances can a 
person considered insane be 
detained in an Asylum against 
his declared will?” 


ESSAY 


THE ANSWER TO the above question offers not inconsid- 
erable difficulties as only a few or no explicit regulations exist 
in law, and what can be described as existing law must mainly 
be derived from general principles. 

In illustration I will start with a practical example. 
My neighbor, Mr. N., complains incessantly about unlawful 
deprivation of his liberty, calls for the Public Prosecutor and 
the Mayor, and believes he can expect them to intervene 
against the administration of the Asylum for depriving him of 
his liberty. 

Objectively, of course, the case is one of confinement in the 
sense of § 239, Str.G.B. However, it is a criminal offense only 
if the confinement is unlawful; hence, as Oppenhof states in 
his commentary—the only work on criminal law within my 


121. This essay was written early 1900, at the time of my complete isolation from 
the outside world, and therefore almost totally without the opportunity of using 
literary sources. 


ie 
313 
Ll 


Appendix 


reach at the moment—deprivations of liberty in the course of 
exercising educational, correctional or domestic rights, or a 
duty as for instance professional, official or supervisory are ex- 
cluded. A Public Prosecutor or an examining magistrate who 
keeps in provisional custody or commits for trial a person 
charged or accused in accordance with the regulations of the 
law, and equally the authorities of a prison executing a penalty 
of imprisonment inflicted by a Court, naturally do not act un- 
lawfully. The same applies to the administration of a Public 
Asylum for the Insane, if within its competence it orders the 
confinement of a person handed over to the Asylum or arranges 
for further limitations of such a person's liberty. Before dis- 
cussing the extent and limits of this competence it will first 
be discussed how this applies to Private Establishments for the 
Insane. 

The admission of a person to a Private Establishment for 
the Insane and his stay therein is dependent on such a person's 
expressly or implicitly declared will, unless he is held in tute- 
lage; the request of relatives may in certain circumstances be 
of practical value to protect the administration of the Asylum 
against the reproach of acting arbitrarily; in itself it is of no le- 
gal significance. On the other hand one can maintain that if 
somebody allows himself to be admitted to a Private Asylum, 
he thereby submits from the beginning to limitations of his 
liberty such as result from the regulations of the establishment 
or from necessary measures taken by the chief physician in the 
exercise of his duties for the physical and mental well-being of 
the patient. Limitation of possible excursions, the allotment 
of certain rooms in the Asylum, etc., must be accepted by the 
person admitted without his being able to complain of unlaw- 
ful deprivation of liberty even if his opposition is met by force. 
Likewise, immediate discharge cannot be demanded at the in- 
stance of any sudden impulse (ad nutum); the Director of the 
Asylum would be in his right to ignore such demands, if in his 


= 
314 





Appendix 


professional opinion he believes them to be only inconsisten- 
cies of will due to the patient’s morbid frame of mind, which 
can be presumed not to be lasting. It is different, however, if 
a patient not kept under tutelage declares his will to be 
discharged from the Asylum persistently and in a manner 
testifying his careful consideration, for instance for the pur- 
pose of being transferred to another Asylum or being nursed 
by his family. The mere subjective opinion of the chief physi- 
cian that the patient would be better left in his hands than 
anywhere else, would not entitle the former to restrict the pa- 
tient in any way in the choice of his future residence. An ex- 
ception would only arise if the patient’s mental state had 
assumed a character which would make his being at liberty 
dangerous either to himself or others, in particular when sui- 
cide is suspected. In this case the chief physician would be en- 
titled, possibly with the consent of the patient's relatives, to 
make preparations for his transfer to a Public Asylum, and to 
have the patient supervised till then against his will in the 
Asylum and during the transfer without laying himself open to 
the charge of unlawful deprivation of liberty. He exercises po- 
lice functions, as an executive organ of the Public Authorities 
and is thus exempt from all criminal responsibility, as in 
§ 127, Str.-Pr.-O. in the case of somebody who arrests a person 
caught in a criminal act.'” 





122, This is also the reason—albeit not the only one—why the undertaking of 
“Private Lunatic Asylums” has been made dependent on a concession of the supe- 
rior Administrative Authority in § 30 of the Trade Regulations. In view of the ac- 
tual power which must be invested in the Directors of such Asylums over the 
person of the patient, the State deems it necessary that only persons be entrusted 
with keeping such establishments, whose reliability is beyond doubt. The grant- 
ing of such a concession, however, has not the significance of giving to the 
Directors of Private Asylums for the Insane the capacity of permanent organs of 
the security police, in other words they are not endowed permanently with the 


power of official authority. 


ee sd 
315 
L 


Appendix 


The final custody of insane persons who might be a danger 
to themselves or others, is incumbent on the Public Asylums. 
Regulations about their establishment were issued for the 
Kingdom of Saxony in a Directive for the Care in a Country 
Asylum of Insane Persons” published in the form of an extract 
by the decree of 31st July 1893 (G.u.V.Bl. p. 157 ff.). But this 
Directive does not contain the essential sedes materiae in 
respect of the question in what conditions a person can be 
brought to, or kept in, a Public Asylum against his declared 
will. The Judge in a criminal Court could not immediately find 
from the Directive—although some of its stipulations may be 
supportive—the norm according to which to decide the ques- 
tion whether illegal deprivation of liberty exists. The Directive 
contains stipulations about the establishment and the province 
of respective Asylums, regulates the conditions of admission 
and transfer to them, obviously considers admission mainly 
from the point of view of a benefit to the person admitted (com- 
pare § 1 under 4},'** safeguards in particular the fiscal interest in 
securing the maintenance costs and can therefore only be con- 
sidered as a compilation of service instructions for Asylum of- 
ficials, which has no direct legal power. To answer the 
question raised at the beginning, one has therefore to revert to 
general principles. 

From this point of view the accommodation and mainte- 
nance of insane persons in institutions established for that 
purpose is part of the State’s task of general care for the well- 
being and safety of its subjects. The State—or by delegation 
the municipality—provides opportunity for intellectual educa- 
tion through schools and other higher educational institutes, 
cares in special schools for the deaf and dumb, the blind, etc., 





123. In the meantime superseded by the new Directive of Ist March 1902 
(G.u.V.BL p. 39 ff.). 


124. Inthe Directive of Ist March 1902, § 2. 


all 
316 
(Bi el 





Appendix 


for handicapped persons to obtain adequate education; keeps 
hospitals and infirmaries for the sick and alms-houses for 
needy persons, etc.; likewise the State has founded recently” 
Public Asylums with the object of medical treatment, supervi- 
sion and maintenance of the insane. The use of all such wel- 
fare institutions is however as a rule not forced upon a person; 
on the contrary the persons concerned or their legal represen- 
tatives are free in their choice as to whether or not they want 
to make use of them—unless special laws order something dif- 
ferent, as for instance compulsory education. The same would 
apply also to Public Asylums, if apart from the furtherance of 
public welfare their work were not in many cases simultane- 
ously a matter for the security police. 

One must make a distinction therefore between insane per- 
sons whose detention is in the public interest and those to 
whom this does not apply. To the first class belong all those in- 
sane persons who through their illness could become danger- 
ous either to themselves or others, particularly cases of raving 
madness or melancholia, the latter particularly through the 
possibility of suicide. In general one has to count amongst the 
same category persons who are admitted to the Country Home 
at Colditz according to the regulation of 30th July 1893 under 
2,6 namely incurable cases where patients are “deeply de- 
mented and abhorrent to look at.” To the second class belong 
all the other cases of mental illness—of a severe or lighter 
character, showing perhaps only a few delusions—of whom it 


125. In earlier centuries, as far as I know, the insane were simply put into prisons 
or similar places as “demoniacs” without any question of treatment. As I have no 
access to literary sources in my present abode I might be mistaken. It should be 
easy, however, for the specialist to ascertain a possible error. It would seem ac- 
cording to Kraepelin, PSYCHIATRY, 4th Edition, 1893, p. 230 ff. that what has been 
said in the text is correct in its essentials (added in February 1901). 


126. Inthe Directive of lst March 1902, § 2, part 2, in conjunction with Appendix 
1 under B (G.u.V.BL. p. 38 and 64). 


317 
L 





Appendix 


cannot be said that being at liberty would be dangerous either 
to themselves or others. Mental illnesses of the latter kind I 
would like to designate as cases of harmless insanity for the 
purpose of their position in administrative law—irrespective 
of how these diseases are classified by scientific psychiatry.'”” 

To detain mental patients of the first category—they will 
for short be called dangerous mental patients in the follow- 
ing—even against their will in special Asylums, is not only the 
right but also the obligation of the State from the point of view 
of exercising security police power. 

T he legal right for the deprivation of liberty in a special case 
is therefore not different from a case in which, for example, the 
police detain in custody a person found drunk in the street un- 
til he is sober. It is irrelevant for the legal right depriving a per- 
son of his liberty whether it is a temporary state as in the case 
of drunkenness, or whether as in cases of mental derangement 
these states persist for some time. Similar further legal consid- 
erations therefore apply to both cases from a legal point of view. 
Thus, of course, the admissibility of deprivation of liberty has 
to be decided by the competent authority exercising its duties, 
and not according to the ideas of the person concerned. After 
all it is a daily occurrence that a drunkard assures the arresting 
policeman that he is totally sober. The policeman nevertheless 
has the right to detain him if he is dutifully convinced of the 
contrary. Similarly most mental patients will maintain that 


—_———— 


127. The writer of this essay counts himself amongst the harmlessmental patients 
in the sense described above; it is said of him that he is possessed by religious hal- 
lucinations, whereas in his own opinion these contain objective truth unrecogniz- 
able for other people. He trusts in particular to have proved with this essay that 
cases do in fact exist, in which clarity of logical and particularly juristical think- 
ing is unimpaired by the presumed hallucinations, so that one cannot maintain 
the existence of a morbid mental derangement excluding free determination of 
will in the direction of reasonable action in the sense of § 104? of the German B.- 
G.-B., nor an inability to look after his own affairs in the sense of § 6 of that law. 


indeeaa! 
318 
Cres 





Appendix 


their mental health is in no way disturbed, that they are “un- 
lawfully deprived of their liberty,” and that there is no danger 
either for them or others in the case of their discharge. But the 
Director of a Public Asylum is perfectly justified all the same 
in detaining them in the Asylum, even to limit their freedom 
still further, whenever he believes from his scientific experi- 
ence and the nature of the particular illness that such a danger 
exists despite protests to the contrary. Further, the duration for 
which deprivation of liberty is admissible is dependent on the 
persistence of its lawful reason. The drunken person must be 
discharged by the police authorities as soon as his drunkenness 
has passed, unless an additional reason exists for detaining 
him. In the same way discharge cannot be denied a person ad- 
mitted to a Public Asylum or his legal representative once the 
illness is cured or has lost the particular character which made 
the patient’s liberty a danger to himself and others. 

As to the second category, the harmless mental patients in 
the above sense, no public interest in their detention arises. If 
they are patients in a Public Asylum, the Asylum’s administra- 
tion is on the whole in the same legal position to them as the 
Director of a Private Asylum discussed above. If tutelage exists 
a declaration of an insane person’s intent is legally void, partic- 
ularly his request to be discharged from the Asylum. For the 
personal care of the ward is vested in the guardian, also in the 
case of persons of age, within the limits of the purpose of this 
guardianship (§ 1901 in conjunction with §§ 1897 and 1858, 
German B.-G.-B.). The formally superseded regulation under II, 
§ 5 of the law of 20th February 1882 (“the guardians of persons 
placed under tutelage because of insanity and of the persons 
named under §§ 2 to 4 are entrusted to prevent their wards 
from damaging themselves or others, and if necessary to place 
them into an Asylum”) has still materially and essentially to 
be regarded as valid law irrespective of the change in law as 
given above. 


Appendix 


If therefore the guardian or the judicial authority deems ad- 
mission of a mental patient to a Public Asylum necessary, the 
insane patient himself is not heard when expressing the re- 
verse request. But if the patient is not under tutelage or if this 
is later rescinded, the administration of the Asylum must re- 
spect in the case of a harmless mental illness the persistently 
pronounced will of a mental patient to be discharged from the 
Asylum as coming from a person capable of managing his own 
affairs, just like the Director of a Private Asylum as described 
above. In particular it cannot ignore the right of a mental pa- 
tient to change his residence, particularly to be transferred to 
another Asylum, even to forego medical treatment altogether, 
on the assumption that from a medical point of view it has bet- 
ter insight into what is in the patient’s real interests. Were one 
to offend against this, the taking away of liberty would indeed 
assume the character of an unlawful deprivation of liberty 
Towards harmless mental patients the Director of a Public 
Asylum is after all not an organ of the security police with au- 
thoritative power, but essentially only a medical adviser; on 
the question of deprivation of liberty his relation to his pa- 
tients is in no way different from that of any private practi- 
tioner towards his patients. 

If one compares the conclusions reached above with the 
regulations of the Directive of 1893, one must not expect to 
find in the various regulations an express confirmation of 
these conclusions which have been drawn from general princi- 
ples. The Directive itself as stated above is not intended to reg- 
ulate the question of the conditions in which a deprivation of 
liberty by detention in an Asylum against the will of the pa- 
tient is permitted. In any case considering the authoritative 
source of the Directive, it is of interest to show that nothing is 
contained in the Directive which would make the above prin- 
ciples appear doubtful. Particularly important are the regula- 
tions concerning the discharge or granting of leave in § 10 of 





Appendix 


the Directive.’?* These distinguish between cases in which dis- 
charge of a patient can be decided upon by the administration 
of the Asylum and those where a decision of the Ministry of 
the Interior must be obtained. When in § 10 under 1" it is 
stated, that the discharge can take place on the decision of the 
administration of the Asylum in the cases under a, b and c, 
this, of course, does not amount to the exclusion of an obliga- 
tion on the Asylum’s administration in certain circumstances. 
Such an obligation exists particularly in the case under c. The 
“competent party” who can request discharge is, according to 
circumstances, either the patient himself (if capable of manag- 
ing his own affairs) or his legal representative (the parental au- 
thority, the guardian or the judicial authority): “Doubts which 
the Asylum’s administration may entertain about a discharge 
requested from a competent party,” must be founded on con- 
siderations arising from security police interests, that is to say 
they can only be asserted if the patient in the opinion of the 
Asylum’s administration is considered a “dangerous mental 
patient” in the above-discussed sense (compare also § 1 under 
2 of the Directive’). 

But if the Asylum’s administration has to admit that it is 
not a case of that kind, but one of a harmless mental illness, 
the request must be allowed, even if in their personal opinion 
retention in the Asylum appears advisable “for the purpose of 
cure or improvement of the patient’s state” (§ 1, Section 2 of 
the Directive’). Should the administration force this opinion 
on the patient (capable of managing his affairs) himself or on 


128. In the Directive of 1902, § 42. 


129. In the Directive of 1902, § 42, under 1, a toc, the “can take place” has been 
altered to “has to be ordered.” 


130. In the Directive of 1902, § 1, paragraph 3. 


131. In the Directive of 1902, § 1 seems to be slightly altered for editorial reasons 
only. 


Appendix 


his legal representatives, whether persons or bodies, they 
would transgress the limits of their competence, in other 
words be guilty of unlawful deprivation of liberty. 

The purpose of § 10, 2 of the Directive’ seems to be 
to provide the Ministry of the Interior with the opportu- 
nity to forestall possible miscarriages to which the Asylum’s 
administration might be inclined. It is of course in the public 
interest that the confidence in the regular administration of 
Public Asylums should nowhere be shaken, and to avoid a case 
arising in practice of criminal proceedings being brought 
against the Director of a Public Asylum for unlawful depriva- 
tion of liberty, or even a lawsuit for damages on these grounds. 


POSTSCRIPT 


Only subsequently was the author's attention drawn to the 
Ministerial decree of 13th May 1894 regarding the accommo- 
dation of patients in Private Asylums (G.u.V.Bl. p. 139 ff.) 
which were until then unknown to him as he himself has lived 
in Asylums since the end of 1893. In his opinion nothing is 
contained in the Ministerial decree which contradicts the 
opinions developed in the present essay. In any case actual 
force of law does not appertain to it, and hence in a given case 
it is not binding for the Judge (apart from the regulation about 
punishment under 9). It is obviously not intended to give 
greater powers with respect to deprivation of liberty to the 
Directors of Private Asylums than they have according to gen- 
eral principles; on the contrary it adds in this respect to the 
obligations arising from the general principles further (instruc- 
tional) obligations, which may lead offending Directors of 
Asylums to a police penalty {applying number 9 of the regula- 





132, In the Directive of 1902, § 42, under 2c. 


(ee ean 
322 
ts 





Appendix 


tion) and if necessary to the withdrawal of their concession. 
The decisive point by which the Judge must be guided in the 
case of a possible indictment for deprivation of liberty will al- 
ways be, whether and in how far the Director of an Asylum for 
the Insane has to be considered simultaneously as an official 
organ exercising the powers of the security police with respect 
to detaining dangerous insane patients. This is the case with 
Directors of Public Asylums—they have authoritative powers 
much as on the railways certain officials exercise the powers 
of railway police, but not with the Directors of Private Asy- 
lums (apart from the exception of temporary care until the 
transfer of a patient to a Public Asylum}. 


SECOND POSTSCRIPT 


In the meantime the Ministerial decree of 30th May 1894 has 
again been superseded by another decree, concerning the ad- 
mission of patients in Private Asylums of 9th August 1900 
(G.u.V.BI. p. 887 ff.) and the Directive of 31st July 1893 by the 
Directive for the admission to a Country Asylum for the 
Insane of lst March 1902 (G.u.V.BI. p. 39 ff.). 

This might imply some modification for Saxony of what 
has been said in the previous essay; but these modifications are 
certainly not of fundamental importance. Above all it must be 
stressed repeatedly, that the mentioned regulations and de- 
crees are not acts of the legislature. Therefore if ever a Court of 
Justice has to deal with a question of unlawful deprivation of 
liberty, whether in civil or criminal law, the regulations in the 
recent decrees and Directive could in any case not be consid- 
ered decisive as such and by themselves. Where for instance 
the decree of 9th August 1900 § 6 states with respect to so- 
called “voluntary boarders” in a Private Asylum (that is, pa- 
tients who have entered the Asylum of their own free willl} 


aeal 
323 
Lee 


Appendix 


that the discharge of a voluntary boarder has to be allowed 
whether requested by himself or his legal representative “in 
every case without delay," it can certainly not be assumed 
that every delay of his release would constitute an unlawful 
deprivation of liberty, on which a responsibility according to 
civil or criminal law of the Asylum’s Director can be founded. 
One must keep in mind that the distinction between a patient 
merely “mentally ill” and an “insane patient” is an extremely 
difficult one and that these forms of illness shade into one an- 
other in almost imperceptible transitions. 

It can therefore easily happen that the state of a “mentally 
ill person,” who of his own free will entered a Private Asylum 
as “voluntary boarder” undergoes such changes during his stay 
in the Asylum, that his immediate discharge (because of suici- 
dal intent) would be dangerous for the patient himself. The 
regulation § 5 Part 2 of the decree of 9th August 1900 cannot 
be adduced in such a case, because it deals only with “publicly 
dangerous” mental patients or imbeciles. Can then a certain 
delay of the discharge (for the purpose of informing the police 
or the relatives in order to transfer the patient to a Public 
Asylum] be charged to the Director of a Private Asylum as an 
unlawful deprivation of liberty in all circumstances? It appears 
to me that one must be extremely cautious before answering 
this question in the affirmative. 





ADDENDA 


COUPEISG WAC. (D°O°GCUSMCESNaTeSs (ESReOuM 
THES SPHR -O¥GIESEIDalsN’GcSs RU ESG ASR: DENeEG 


RESCISSION OF TUTELAGE) 








Medical expert’s report 
to the Court’? 


SONNENSTEIN 
9TH DECEMBER 1899. 


A 


OL 128/01 at C.J.J. 64/992. 


THE RETIRED SENATSPRASIDENT Daniel Paul 
Schreber, Doctor of Law, of Dresden, was admitted to this 
Country Asylum on 29th June 1894 for treatment and has been 
here ever since. 

According to the formal certificate of Professor Flechsig of 
Leipzig issued for the transfer of the patient to this Asylum, 
President Schreber had already had a serious attack of hypo- 
chondria in 1884-1885; he recovered from it and was admitted 
for the second time to the University Psychiatric Clinic in 
Leipzig on 21st November 1893. At the beginning of his stay 
there he mentioned mostly hypochondriacal ideas, complained 





133. The Reports A, B and D follow without any comment {apart from footnotes 
134 and 135). The comparison with the corresponding accounts in the Memoirs 
an@ in my grounds for appeal will show immediately that the reports contain 
some factual mistakes, inexactitudes and misconceptions, But I have no doubt 
that the reason lies to some extent in unreliable reports furnished by third persons 
(attendants, etc,]. 


Poker 
327 
| 


ADDENDA 


that he was suffering from softening of the brain, would soon 
die, etc.; but ideas of persecution soon appeared in the disease 
picture, based on hallucinations, which at first occurred spo- 
radically, while simultaneously marked hyperesthesia, great 
sensitivity to light and noise made their appearance. Later the 
visual and auditory hallucinations multiplied and, in conjunc- 
tion with disturbances of common sensation, ruled his whole 
feeling and thinking; he thought he was dead and rotten, suf- 
fering from the plague, mentioned that all sorts of horrible 
manipulations were being performed on his body, and that he 
was going through more terrible states than anybody had ever 
known. All that for a holy purpose, as indeed he still main- 
tains. These morbid ideas gained so great an influence over 
the patient that he was inaccessible to any other impression, 
sat for hours completely stiff and immobile (hallucinatory stu- 
por); at other times they tortured him so much that he wished 
for death, repeatedly made attempts at drowning himself in 
the bath and demanded the “cyanide destined for him.” 
Gradually the delusions took on a mystical and religious char- 
acter, he communicated directly with God, devils were playing 
their games with him, he saw “miracles,” heard “holy music,” 
and finally even believed that he was living in another world. 
In this Asylum, to which President Schreber was trans- 
ferred after a short stay in the private establishment of Dr. 
Pierson, he showed at first mainly the same picture as in 
Leipzig. This physically strong man, in whom frequent jerk- 
ings of the face musculature and marked tremor of the hands 
were noticeable, was at first completely inaccessible and shut 
off in himself, lay or stood immobile and stared with fright- 
ened eyes straight ahead of himself into space; he did not an- 
swer questions at all or only very briefly and protestingly; but 
clearly this rigid demeanor was far removed from indifference, 
rather the patient’s whole state seemed tense, irritable, caused 
by inner uneasiness and there could be no doubt that he was 





Addendum A 


continually influenced by vivid and painful hallucinations, 
which he elaborated in a delusional manner. In the same way 
the patient abruptly rejected every communication and contin- 
ually demanded to be left alone, indeed even that the whole 
house be cleared because God’s omnipotence was being ob- 
structed by the presence of attendants and others, while he 
himself wanted “divine peace.” For the same reason he refused 
nourishment so that he had to be forcibly fed, or only took a 
few light dishes, refusing meat completely, and it was only 
with great difficulty that he was gradually made to eat regu- 
larly again. At the same time he retained his stool apparently 
deliberately, as far as he possibly could; he was therefore even 
incontinent at times.'* Similarly for a long time it was impos- 
sible to persuade him to any activity such as reading, which he 
rejected because every word he read was being shouted out 
through the whole world. He frequently complained that there 
was a “loss of rays,” that the doctor had “negligently emitted 
rays,” without explaining more closely what he meant. 

In November 1894 the patient's stiff posture loosened a lit- 
tle, he came out of himself more, became more mobile, started 
to speak coherently although in an abrupt and somewhat stac- 
cato manner; there now emerged undisguised, the fantastic 
delusional elaboration of his continual hallucinations; he felt 
himself adversely influenced by certain persons previously 
known to him (Flechsig, v. W...), whom he believed to be 
present here, thought that the world had been changed by 
them, God’s omnipotence destroyed, he himself struck by 
their curses; maintained that they pulled thoughts out of his 
body and suchlike. While he continued to refuse to read, he 
sometimes wrote stenographic signs on paper, occupied him- 
self occasionally with a game of patience, and appeared to give 


a little more attention to events in his environment. 
ok Sie ee, 


134. These reported soilings find their true explanation in my statements at the 


end of Chapter 16 of the Memoirs. 








ADDENDA 


Very gradually the patient's excitement mounted further, dis- 
turbed his, up till then, moderate sleep and manifested itself ex- 
ternally, particularly by loud persistent laughter occurring to a 
certain extent in attacks (by day as well as by night), and by 
heavy hammering on the piano in a most disturbing manner. 
That this very striking behavior had to be looked upon as a reac- 
tion to hallucinations, particularly to delusional ideas springing 
from them, became evident from some of the patient's state- 
ments, such as that the world had come to an end, that every- 
thing he saw round himself was only a sham, he himself and the 
persons around him only lifeless shadows. At the same time he 
still had hypochondriacal ideas, mentioned among others that 
his body was completely changed, one lung had disappeared alto- 
gether, and he could hardly breathe sufficiently to remain alive. 

Subsequently, the nights in particular became increasingly 
restless, while simultaneously a change occurred in him inso- 
far as the earlier continuously stiff rejecting and negativistic 
attitude gave place, so to speak, to a certain dualism. On the 
one hand the reaction against the hallucinations became in- 
creasingly noisy and intense, in the garden the patient used to 
stand for a long time motionless in one place, staring into 
the sun, at the same time grimacing in an extraordinary way 
or bellowing very loudly at the sun with threats and impreca- 
tions, usually repeating endlessly one and the same phrase, 
shouting at her, that she was afraid of him, and that she had to 
hide from him the Senatsprdsident Schreber, and also called 
himself Ormuzd. Or he raved in his room to such an extent, 
harangued for some time the “soul murderer” Flechsig, re- 
peated endlessly “little Flechsig,” putting heavy accent on the 
first word, or shouted abuse and suchlike out of his window 
with such tremendous force even at night, that the towns- 
people gathered and complained of the disturbance. On the 
other hand he was in many respects more polite and accessible 
towards the doctors and other persons, even if they surprised 


(aig 
330 
ee) 





Addendum A 


him during such noisy scenes, even answered simple questions 
about his condition, etc., though in a somewhat reserved and 
patronizing manner, said nothing of his troubles and was able 
to control himself for a little while quite well; he also started 
to read, play chess and piano as he had done before. 

In the meantime the nightly scenes became increasingly 
noisy unchecked by the sleeping drugs given in ever-increasing 
doses, so that, as the medicines could not be increased without 
fear of causing harm, and as the whole department suffered 
considerably through the continual nightly disturbances, one 
was forced in June 1896 to segregate the patient at night in a 
more isolated room and carry this out for a number of months." 
The patient, of course, was somewhat irritated by this, but per- 
mitted it without marked resistance, apparently realizing that 
his actions were pathological and causing extraordinary almost 
unbearable annoyance to his environment. 

For some time the physical behavior of the patient showed 
only little change, the peculiar very loud forced laughter and 
the monotonous uttering in endless repetition of incompre- 
hensible abusive language (for instance “the sun is a whore,” 
and suchlike}, which served apparently to a certain extent as 
counter-action against the hallucinations and disturbances of 
feeling (pain in the back, etc.), continued as before, sleep re- 
mained very deficient but nourishment was taken more ade- 
quately and he was gaining weight; even then there were early 
signs of a peculiar delusion which developed later: the patient 
was frequently found in his room half undressed, declared that 
he already had feminine breasts, liked to occupy himself by 
looking at pictures of naked women, even drew them and had 
his mustache removed. 

However, perhaps since the spring of 1897 a change was 
noticed in the patient; he entered into a lively correspondence 





135. As regards the duration, compare pages 181, 182, 184 (two and a half years). 


Geel 
331 
bes 


ADDENDA 


with his wife and other relatives; and it must be admitted that 
the letters were correctly and deftly written, and hardly showed 
anything pathological, but rather a certain insight, when for 
instance he revealed that he had been very frightened, had 
not been able to get himself to do anything, but that things 
were now much better and he was grateful to be able to find 
so much stimulating conversation, etc., while nevertheless 
the former insulting, laughing and shouting continued, and 
nightly isolation could not be discontinued. 

Even while the patient continued to show himself little in- 
clined to more serious conversation, and soon became restless 
and impatient when this was attempted, started to grimace, 
utter peculiar short interjections and one could see that he 
wished the conversation quickly finished, nevertheless the pa- 
tient’s occupations became more varied and more continuous; 
frequently it was difficult to understand how he could achieve 
sufficient peace and concentration for such intellectual work 
during the continuous obviously intensive hallucinatory bur- 
den, to talk about the most varied matters in a relevant man- 
ner and moreover to control himself in a way which at times 
hid his illness. Gradually even the nightly noisy outbursts di- 
minished, so that the patient could again use his usual bed- 
room and remain in it with only little support from drugs. 

Without going further into all the details of the course of 
his illness, attention is drawn to the way in which from the 
early more acute psychosis which influenced all psychic 
processes and which could be called hallucinatory insanity, 
the paranoid form of illness became more and more marked, 
crystallized out so to speak, into its present picture. 

This kind of illness is, as is well known, characterized by 
the fact that next to a more or less fixed elaborate delusional 
system there is complete possession of mental faculties and 
orientation, formal logic is retained, marked affective reactions 
are missing, neither intelligence nor memory are particularly 





Addendum A 


affected and the conception and judgment of indifferent mat- 
ters, that is to say matters far removed from the delusional 
ideas, appear not to be particularly affected, although naturally 
because of the unity of all psychic events they are not un- 
touched by them. 

Thus President Schreber now appears neither confused, nor 
psychically inhibited, nor markedly affected in his intelli- 
gence, apart from the psychomotor symptoms which stand out 
clearly as pathological even to the casual observer: he is cir- 
cumspect, his memory excellent, he commands a great deal of 
knowledge, not only in matters of law but in many other 
fields, and is able to reproduce it in an orderly manner, he is 
interested in political, scientific and artistic events, etc., and 
occupies himself with them continuously (although recently 
he seems to have been distracted from them a little more 
again), and little would be noticeable in these directions to an 
observer not informed of his total state. Nevertheless, the pa- 
tient is filled with pathological ideas, which are woven into a 
complete system, more or less fixed, and not amenable to cor- 
rection by objective evidence and judgment of circumstances 
as they really are; the latter still less so as hallucinatory and 
delusory processes continue to be of importance to him and 
hinder norma] evaluation of sensory impressions. As a rule the 
patient does not mention these pathological ideas or only hints 
at them, but it is evident how much he is occupied by them, 
partly from some of his writings (extracts of some are added}, 
partly it is easily seen from his whole bearing. 

The patient’s delusional system amounts to this: he is 
called to redeem the world and to bring back to mankind the 
lost state of Blessedness. He maintains he has been given this 
task by direct divine inspiration, similar to that taught by the 
prophets; he maintains that nerves in a state of excitation, as 
his have been for a long time, have the property of attracting 
God, but it is a question of things which are either not at all 


r 
333 
{E, 


ADDENDA 


expressible in human language or only with great difficulty, 
because he maintains they lie outside all human experience 
and have only been revealed to him. The most essential part of 
his mission of redemption is that it is necessary for him first of 
all to be transformed into a woman. Not, however, that he 
wishes to be transformed into a woman, it is much more a 
“must” according to the Order of the World, which he simply 
cannot escape, even though he would personally very much 
prefer to remain in his honorable manly position in life. But 
the beyond was not to be gained again for himself and the 
whole of mankind other than by this future transformation 
into a woman by way of divine miracle in the course of years 
or decades. He maintains that he is the exclusive object of di- 
vine miracles, and with it the most remarkable human being 
that ever lived on earth. For years at every hour and every 
minute he experiences these miracles in his body, has them 
confirmed also by voices that speak to him. He maintains that 
in the earlier years of his illness he suffered destruction of indi- 
vidual organs of his body, of a kind which would have brought 
death to every other human being, that he lived for a long time 
without stomach, without intestines, bladder, almost without 
lungs, with smashed ribs, torn gullet, that he had at times 
eaten part of his own larynx with his food, etc.; but divine mir- 
acles (“rays”) had always restored the destroyed organs, and 
therefore, as long as he remained a man, he was absolutely 
immortal. These threatening phenomena have long ago disap- 
peared, and in their place his “femaleness” had come to the 
fore; it is a question of an evolutionary process which in all 
probability will take decades if not centuries for its completion 
and the end of which is unlikely to be witnessed by any human 
being now alive. He has the feeling that already masses of “fe- 
male nerves” have been transferred into his body, from which 
through immediate fertilization by God new human beings 
would come forth. Only then would he be able to die a natural 





Addendum A 


death and have gained for himself as for all other human be- 
ings the state of Blessedness. In the meantime not only the sun 
but also the trees and the birds, which he thinks are something 
like “remains of previous human souls transformed by mira- 
cles,” speak to him in human tones and everywhere around 
him miracles are enacted. 

It is not really necessary to go further into all the details of 
these delusional ideas, which by the way are developed and 
motivated with remarkable clarity and logical precision—the 
description given should suffice to give an idea of the content 
of the patient’s delusional system and of his pathologically al- 
tered conception of the world, and it only remains to mention 
that also in the patient’s behavior, in the clean shaving of his 
face, in his pleasure in feminine toilet articles, in small femi- 
nine occupations, in the tendency to undress more or less and 
to look at himself in the mirror, to decorate himself with gay 
ribbons and bows, etc., in a feminine way, the pathological di- 
rection of his fantasy is manifested continually. At the same 
time the hallucinatory processes, as already mentioned above, 
continue in unaltered intensity and they as well as certain 
pathological motor impulses are shown by very noticeable in- 
voluntary automatic actions. As the patient himself declares, 
he is very frequently forced by day and night to utter “unnatu- 
ral bellowing sounds”; he affirms that he cannot control them, 
that it is a matter of divine miracles, of supernatural happen- 
ings, which cannot be understood by other human beings, and 
these vociferations, based on physical compulsion, and very 
annoying also for his environment, occur so unremittingly 
that they disturb the patient’s nightly rest in the most painful 
way and necessitate the use of sleeping drugs. 

Only in one connection has the patient in recent times 
shown a change in attitude; whereas previously, perhaps be- 
cause of a more marked feeling of being ill, he was to a certain 
extent resigned to his fate, although protesting here and there 


ADDENDA 


against some measures, did not give any external sign of wish- 
ing to change his situation and appeared to have little interest 
in his legal and social affairs, he now demands energetically 
the lifting of his tutelage, wishes for freer movement and 
more active contact with the outer world and expects defi- 
nitely to return to his home in the not too distant future. 
These plans exercise him a good deal and have apparently even 
pushed the mentioned pathological ideas to a certain extent 
into the background. 

Whether President Schreber is to be considered deprived of 
the use of reason in terms of the law by virtue of the above 
exposition of his pathological mental state, which must be la- 
beled paranoia, is a question for the Court to decide. If, how- 
ever, what has been said gives the impression, far removed 
from medical opinion, that the patient is prevented by mental 
illness from understanding all events objectively and correctly, 
from judging them by circumstances as they really are, and 
from taking his decisions after unimpaired sensible considera- 
tion and with free will, then clearly in this case the existing 
hallucinations, the delusions connected with them and built 
up into a system, and the irresistible impulses which rule the 
patient, amount to a considerable degree of impairment and 
continue to do so. 

There is no medical objection to President Schreber being 
examined by the Court. 

The aforementioned is attested by the undersigned acting 
under his oath of office. 


L.S. 
(Signed) Dr. Weber, 


Superintendent of the Asylum, 
Area Psychiatrist, Psychiatric 
Adviser to the Court. 


r 
336 





Asylum and District Medical 
Officer’s report 


SONNENSTEIN 
28TH NOVEMBER 1900. 


THE UNDERSIGNED HAS delayed for so long furnish- 
ing a further report about the retired President Schreber’s men- 
tal state because his psychic condition has not undergone any 
marked change since rendering the first report, and therefore 
one would have to repeat in the main the previous statements, 
unless new viewpoints for deciding the issue one way or the 
other could be found. 

The undersigned believes to have found such in the writ- 
ings which the patient commenced some months ago and 
which deal in the most detailed manner with the history of his 
illness of many years’ duration, both in its external relations 
and in its inner development. These writings are to be given all 
the more weight because in general the patient is little in- 
clined to reveal his pathological ideas to other persons, and 
further because these ideas are elaborated in so complicated 
and subtle a manner that he himself admits that rendering 
them by word of mouth is difficult. In fact the "Memoirs of my 
Nervous I]lness” as the author calls his treatise, are not only 


Teal 
337 


ADDENDA 


valuable from the scientific medical point of view for assessing 
the total character of his illness, but they also afford ample 
support of practical value for the understanding of the patient's 
behavior. Because the “Memoirs” have become more bulky 
than was visualized, their completion has taken considerable 
time, and only a short time ago was a complete copy received 
by the undersigned. 

Further, as in the present state of affairs emphasis should 
be placed not on clinical exposition of, and an opinion on the 
mental illness which is doubtless present, but on trying to an- 
swer the question whether the patient is incapable, owing to 
his illness, of looking after his affairs—in the broadest sense 
of this word—the undersigned wished to attempt to establish a 
number of definite facts on which the Judge would be able to 
base his judgment on this question. The undersigned wishes 
to emphasize again, as he did in his first report, that it should 
not be considered the province of the medical expert to give the 
final decision whether a person is capable in consequence of 
mental derangement of taking care of his own interests, is ca- 
pable of acting in the sense of the law; but that his task should 
be confined to furnishing the competent authorities with a 
statement of the mental condition of a person in such a way 
that the authorities are enabled to draw their own conclusions. 

If evidence is demanded of actual events which would 
prove that the person on whom an opinion is to be given is in- 
capable owing to mental illness of managing his affairs, or as it 
is put in the resolution on the evidence, would by unreason- 
able actions endanger his life, his health, his property or any 
other of his interests in life were he given freedom to manage 
his affairs, it is obviously very difficult, in fact almost impossi- 
ble, to furnish such factual evidence in respect of a person who 
for years has been interned in an asylum owing to his mental 
state and therefore can interfere only very little in the shaping 
of his outer circumstances by his own actions. If one is dealing 





Addendum B 


with a mental patient who moves in the outer world and is in 
direct contact with his previous circumstances of life, then 
actual events will be established without difficulty in the way 
he carries out his job, in the way he manages his business af- 
fairs, in his family life, in social intercourse, his contact with 
authorities, etc., which provide a definite answer to the ques- 
tion whether the patient owing to his abnormal mental state 
acts inappropriately, unreasonably and wrongly. Matters are 
different in the case of a patient confined in an asylum. In 
the nature of things his life is ordered down to the smallest 
detail by the authorities of the Asylum, he does not come 
into contact with the unending manifold demands of life; 
how he would conduct himself if faced with them can only be 
surmised from his total state. The matter could be put to 
the test by exposing him temporarily to those demands and 
placing him outside the shelter of the Asylum. Indeed such 
tests are carried out in some cases—mostly only when it 
would not matter much if the patient did compromise him- 
self—and indeed the undersigned believed that even in the 
present case this method should be employed to a limited 
extent. But this would have required a longer interval. Neither 
did President Schreber show inclination to move outside the 
Asylum until recently, nor could this be attempted with- 
out considerable concern owing to his conduct up till now. 
Only since contesting his tutelage was the patient prepared 
to move about more freely; the desire to move out of the 
confines of his inner life and to approach the outside world 
again had to be gradually encouraged in him. In consideration 
of many circumstances, particularly the reasonable concern of 
his family, it has not been possible to extend the trials in this 
direction as much as was planned, and although taking meals 
regularly at the family table of the undersigned, taking part 
in social occasions, joining in excursions extending as far as 
Dresden to the home of his wife, the carrying out of small 


ADDENDA 


commissions in the town, afforded the desired occasions for 
observing the patient's behavior in intercourse with the out- 
side world; nevertheless until now definite convincing results 
one way or the other have not been obtained. The undersigned 
does not however think he should delay any longer furnishing 
the required report, but content himself with the observations 
so far made. 

When one considers the course President Schreber’s mental 
illness has taken, it is not necessary as things are at present to 
return to the earlier phases of his illness. Without doubt they 
have considerable importance for understanding the total pic- 
ture of the pathological process, much as every natural phenom- 
enon can only be fully understood if considered in the light of 
its development; further the manner in which the patient him- 
self regards them is important. But for the solution of the pres- 
ent practical question these earlier stages of the illness are not 
as relevant as the actual state to which they have led in the 
course of time and which is now open to observation in its 
more or less ultimate form. In line with the patient's originally 
rich gifts, his mental productivity and his wide education, the 
manifestations of his pathologically altered mind are not, as so 
frequently in otherwise similar cases, poor and monotonous 
and their connections easily surveyed: on the contrary they 
present a structure of ideas so fantastically elaborated and de- 
veloped and so far removed from the usual trends of thought, 
that it is hardly possible to sketch them briefly without ren- 
dering their inner structure incomprehensible and impairing 
understanding of their specific meaning. For this reason and 
for another to be mentioned later, I consider it useful to give 
the Country Court the patient's “Memoirs” complete for their 
consideration, with the humble request to return them later, 
in the belief that from them the Judge will readily obtain a 
clear picture of the author’s mental state without any further 
comment. 


iP aa 
340 
iy gel 





Addendum B 


Clearly according to observations in previous phases of his 
illness the patient was completely unfit to act and not in a po- 
sition to look after his affairs or even to give them any interest, 
and this is quite evident from the patient’s own account. For a 
long time the patient was so absorbed in the pathological 
events of his mental life, his conception of things was so ex- 
clusively determined by hallucinatory imaginings, he was so 
completely disorientated in time, place and person, reality had 
been replaced by such a vast completely fantastic and false 
world of imagination, his emotional life had been so far with- 
drawn from all natural events, his will power was either so in- 
hibited, constrained or employed so much in warding off the 
afflictions of his illness, his actions finally were so unreason- 
able and doubtful, both with regard to his own personal inter- 
ests and to his relations with the outer world, that there could 
be no question of unimpaired self-determination or sensible 
reasoning, rather the patient was completely under the power 
of overwhelming pathological influences. 

In the previous report it was detailed how President Schre- 
ber's acute insanity gradually passed into a chronic state, how 
out of the stormy tides of the hallucinatory insanity a sed- 
iment was, so to speak, deposited and fixed, and gave the ill- 
ness the picture of paranoia. As the accompanying mighty 
affects gradually decreased and the hallucinatory experiences 
lost their confusing and directly overpowering influence, the 
patient was able to a certain extent to put up with them and 
gradually to find his way back to a more orderly mental life. 
He did not, however, realize and recognize the actual products 
of his altered perceptions and the combinations built up on 
them as pathological, nor could he rise above the subjective- 
ness of his views and reach a more objective judgment of events. 
He could not achieve this, because the hallucinations persisted 
and delusions continued to be built on them; but as the accom- 
panying effects became less strong, and common sense and 


ADDENDA 


orientation returned, there occurred a certain split in the total- 
ity of his ideas; the persisting pathologically altered field of his 
mental life became more sharply demarcated from the rest, 
and although in the organic unity of all psychic events the lat- 
ter fields cannot remain altogether intact and a transition of 
seemingly partial disturbances to the whole psychic function 
always occurs, nevertheless it happened in this case as it usu- 
ally does in paranoia, that when the acute illness has run its 
course, certain areas of feeling and thinking appear little 
touched by the pathological changes. Intellectual capacity in 
particular is little impaired, formal association of ideas appears 
to proceed in a regular way, and judgment about matters and 
affairs far removed from the delusional ideas which are re- 
tained and knit into a closed system, are mainly unclouded 
and correct. 

That with these changes in the character of the illness, the 
total state has undergone a real improvement, cannot be said 
without qualification, however much external appearances 
may seem to indicate it. One could even assume the contrary: 
as long as the acute signs of illness lasted one could hope for a 
favorable outcome of the illness, whereas now when one sees 
the fixed result of such a process, this hope must be aban- 
doned. Also there is a total lack, as already stated, of the most 
important criterion of improvement or even recovery, namely 
the more or less clear insight into the pathological nature of 
previous events. President Schreber it is true leaves open 
whether this or that perception could be illusory; in the main 
however he adheres firmly to the reality of his delusional ideas 
and declares the most monstrous of the events described by 
him as facts. 

The patient’s complicated delusional system has its point 
of origin in a most singular conception of the nature of God. 


(An exposition of the “delusional system” follows in the 


are) 
342 
(el 





Addendum B 


form of a short extract from the Memoirs; this can be 
omitted here because the reader has the Memoirs at his 
disposal.) 


It is evident from this short extract and more particularly 
from the patient’s own account, how much even now his 
whole thinking and feeling are still under the influence of 
delusions and hallucinations and to what extent they deter- 
mine his actions, causing him to defend himself against some, 
and to surrender completely to others of the pathological 
events, and to what extent his whole way of regarding the 
world, his judgment about human beings and everyday affairs 
is determined by them. It only remains to ascertain in detail as 
far as possible how far and to what extent the patient's patho- 
logical state influences and rules him in his relations to the 
outer world and the demands of everyday life. 

It must be repeated that the patient's, like so many para- 
noiacs’ intelligence and formal logical associative thinking 
have not apparently suffered to any considerable extent; the 
patient is in command of a great many ideas and can discourse 
about them in orderly fashion; his circumspection is equally 
unimpaired. The undersigned has for nine months had the 
most thorough opportunity of discussing all sorts of subjects 
with President Schreber during daily meals at the family table. 
Whatever matters were discussed—naturally apart from his 
delusions—whether they touched on state administration and 
law, politics, art or literature, social life or anything else, in 
all Doctor Schreber showed keen interest, detailed knowledge, 
good memory and correct judgment, and in ethical matters as 
well an attitude which one can only agree with. Equally he 
was well-behaved and amiable during light conservation with 
the ladies present and his humor was always tactful and de- 
cent; during the harmless table talk he never brought up any- 
thing which should not have been introduced there but during 





ADDENDA 


medical visits. One could not ignore, however, that even during 
meal-times the patient often appeared preoccupied, his atten- 
tion was distracted, and he did not fully take in what was go- 
ing on around him, so that frequently he brought up some 
matter which had only just been discussed. This preoccupation 
was also evident from the patient’s demeanor—he either stares 
rigidly in front of himself or moves restlessly in his chair, gri- 
maces in a peculiar manner, clears his throat more or less 
loudly, touches his face and apparently tries to push his eyelids 
upwards, which in his opinion were “closed by miracles,” that 
is to say closed against his will. Obviously it often requires his 
greatest energy not to utter the “bellowing noises,” and as 
soon as the table is cleared while he is still on his way to his 
room one can hear his inarticulate sounds. 

This distraction of attention by hallucinatory experiences 
and his noticeable reaction to them is disturbing also on other 
occasions. During excursions into the neighborhood, while 
joining in some festive occasion, during a visit to the theater, 
the patient was able to restrain loud outbursts, but that at 
times he felt very embarrassed could be seen from his distorted 
face, his humming, clearing his throat, short bursts of laughter 
and from his whole bearing; indeed even during a visit to his 
wife in Dresden he could not entirely repress the noises at 
table, so that a sign had to be given to the servant-girl not to 
take any notice; and although the visit lasted only a few hours 
he was strikingly keen to return to the Asylum. 

But not only in social relations could the influence of his 
pathological experiences act disturbingly. In its reasons for 
placing the patient under tutelage the District Court in Dresden 
mentioned among others that the patient Schreber would be 
quite capable of presiding over difficult legal proceedings, 
etc. This however must be doubted—the patient himself says 
that he is prevented by the “interferences” (as he presumes 
purposely brought about) from applying himself for any length 


fe wel 
344 
(eee 





Addendum B 


of time to any serious and difficult intellectual work; he 
mentioned himself during the Court hearing that he did not 
consider it feasible to continue practicing his profession, be- 
cause the miracles happening in him attempted to distract 
him. Thus an observer will gain the impression from his be- 
havior that efforts requiring complete mental freedom and 
concentration such as the above are out of the question. 
Outwardly most disturbing have been for a long time 
what the patient himself calls attacks of bellowing, that is to 
say the uttering of partly inarticulate sounds, partly threats 
and imprecations against imaginary disturbers of his well- 
being (Flechsig, etc.). These noisy outbursts occur completely 
automatically and in a compulsive manner against the pa- 
tient’s will. Though he is able to repress them, if not always 
at any rate for a time through lively speech, making music for- 
tissimo, and some other tricks, they sound not only through- 
out the greater part of the day from his living-room and in 
the garden, causing considerable annoyance to his environ- 
ment, but even at night they can often be heard for hours, 
causing intolerable disturbance of peace and quiet in the whole 
department; he sometimes even shouts down into the town 
without regard. Recently especially these vociferations have 
become very noisy, and how the patient himself suffers thereby, 
how helpless and powerless he feels against these “miracles” 
and is forced to the most nonsensical counter-actions, can 
be seen from the enclosed letter. To such counter-measures 
belong, amongst others, that the patient (probably in order to 
evoke the frequently mentioned soul-voluptuousness) moves 
about his room half naked, stands in front of the mirror 
in a very low-cut vest decorated with gay ribbons, gazing 
at what he believes his female bosom. He exposes himself 
to colds by this behavior (earlier on he also stuck his bare 
legs out of the window), the consequences of which he then 
attributes to miracles. He has, by the way, no intention of 


ee eal: 
345 
ees) 


ADDENDA 


damaging himself as he also no longer thinks of suicide, be- 
cause he believes that even the most serious injuries to his 
body cannot affect him. 

It is the patient’s opinion that these attacks of bellowing 
might improve after eventual discharge from the Asylum; but 
in any case he thinks he can avoid the resulting disturbances 
of peace and quiet which would not be tolerated in a house 
with other inhabitants, by finding an isolated dwelling in a gar- 
den. But as his first statement is naturally illusory, so it is 
equally striking that the patient in his morbid egoism does not 
even consider how his wife would have to suffer from all this; 
in fact married life with him would be almost impossible for 
her; not to mention the fact that he considers the nuisance 
caused to his present environment completely irrelevant and 
complains only of his own sufferings. 

The ill-effect of the illness on marital relations is according 
to his wife’s information also noticeable in other ways. Earlier 
on the patient had offered his wife a possible divorce in view of 
his expected unmanning; even now when she demurs and con- 
tradicts his ideas and behavior, he is quick to hint that she 
could leave him if she wished. Therefore in this respect also 
one must not overlook the impact of the pathological process. 

Whether the patient, having regained his independence 
as he desires, could pay enough attention to his financial af- 
fairs and would always live within his means, can hardly be 
anticipated with certainty, because naturally for a long time 
he has had no opportunity to act independently in any impor- 
tant financial matter. As far as observations have been made 
in this direction, the patient has neither shown particular 
parsimony nor a tendency to squander, in fact while his re- 
quirements were satisfied he never inquired further about 
the monetary aspect, whereas he dealt with safeguarding his 
family's copyright in his father’s book in an altogether profes- 
sional manner as far as one can see. But in the face of his grand 





Addendum B 


mission, pecuniary interests naturally recede into the back- 
ground, and it must be regarded as doubtful how far his striv- 
ing for fulfillment of his pathological wishes and hopes for the 
future, as expressed at the end of his Memoirs, and the depend- 
ence of his well-being on certain conditions, would lead him 
into material expenses far beyond his means. 

The most important moment in judging the capacity of the 
patient to look after his affairs is and remains the fact that he 
lacks insight into the pathological nature of the hallucinations 
and ideas which influence him; what objectively are delusions 
and hallucinations are to him unassailable truth and adequate 
motive for action. It follows from this that the patient's 
decisions at a given moment are quite unpredictable; he may 
follow and turn into action what his relatively intact mental 
powers dictate or he may act under the compulsion of his 
pathological mental processes. In this connection I wish to 
draw particular attention to a very pregnant example and for 
this reason also I enclose the patient’s “Memoirs.” It is under- 
standable that the patient felt the urge to describe the history 
of his latter years, to lay down his observations and sufferings 
in writing and to put them before those who have in this or 
that matter a lawful interest in the shape of his fate. But the 
patient harbors the urgent desire to have his “Memoirs” (as 
presented here) printed and made available to the widest cir- 
cles and he is therefore negotiating with a publisher—until 
now of course without success. When one looks at the content 
of his writings, and takes into consideration the abundance 
of indiscretions relating to himself and others contained in 
them, the unembarrassed detailing of the most doubtful and 
aesthetically impossible situations and events, the use of the 
most offensive vulgar words, etc., one finds it quite incompre- 
hensible that a man otherwise tactful and of fine feeling could 
propose an action which would compromise him so severely in 
the eyes of the public, were not his whole attitude to life 


ae 
347 


ADDENDA 


pathological, and he unable to see things in their proper per- 
spective, and if the tremendous overvaluation of his own per- 
son caused by lack of insight into his illness had not clouded 
his appreciation of the limitations imposed on man by society. 

In conjunction with the enclosures I can confine myself to 
what has been said above. The factual material contained 
therein, although for reasons given not complete, is neverthe- 
less on the whole sufficient and reflects the state of affairs so 
clearly that it affords the Judge, in my opinion, the necessary 
basis for a judgment as to whether and to what degree the 
remaining delusions and hallucinations which have been 
worked into a system, influence the free self-determination of 
President Schreber, lead to a compulsion of thoughts, wishes 
and actions, influence him decisively in his mood and de- 
meanor, and whether the present mental illness is sufficient in 
extent and severity to prevent the patient from looking after 
his affairs in the widest sense. 


Dr. Weber, 

Superintendent of the Asylum, 
Area Psychiatrist, Psychiatric 
Adviser to the Court. 


fe 
348 
L 





Grounds of appeal 


| GIVE THE following as grounds for the appeal which I 
have lodged: 


I 
CONCERNING THE EXPOSITION 
OF THE FACTS IN THE JUDGMENT 
AGAINST WHICH I APPEAL. 


The facts laid down in the judgment against which I appeal do 
not represent in the main anything more than a reproduction 
of the text of the written communication handed over to the 
Court by my lawyer at the hearing on 16th May 1900. On the 
whole I agreed with the contents of this document, and did so 
in my letter of 24th May 1900, although several legal argu- 
ments of my lawyers, for instance those under (1) of the facts 
in the judgment and under (2) in the communication, I could 
not consider relevant. What is correct in my opinion in the 


(ria 
349 
es 


ADDENDA 


document was to no little extent written by my own pen, that 
is to say taken from the representation which I sent to the 
Director of this Asylum on 24th March 1900 and of which as 
far as I know there is a copy in the files of the Court. 

I am forced to contradict severely two statements in the 
judgment. Yet, I would expect no success from a rectification 
of the facts in the judgment in the sense of § 320 C.P.O., as I 
cannot refute that my lawyer actually made the statements 
concerned during the hearing. My lawyer’s statements are in 
this respect, however, based on a misunderstanding of my own 
opinion, the case arises therefore of a revocation of admissions 
in the sense of § 290 C.P.O. 

The two points in question are as follows: 


(1) At the very beginning of establishing the facts the judg- 
ment referring to a passage in the communication from my 
lawyer states: 

“The appellant does not contradict that he is mentally ill.” 

This is incorrect; I refute most decidedly that Iam mentally 
ill if, as is usual among laymen, this word is combined with 
an idea of clouded intellect. I made this point quite clear also 
in my representation to the Director of the Asylum on 24th 
March 1900. 

I explained there that I do not argue the presence of a men- 
tal illness in the sense of a nervous illness; but I drew special 
attention to the different meanings of “mentally ill” for the 
medical man and legally. 

I want to explain this a little more fully: I do not deny that 
my nervous system has for a number of years been in a patho- 
logical condition. On the other hand, I deny absolutely that I 
am mentally ill or ever have been. My mind, that is to say 
the functioning of my intellectual powers, is as clear and 
healthy as any other person’s; it has been unaltered since the 
beginning of my nervous illness—apart from some unimpor- 





Addendum C 


tant hypochondriacal ideas. Therefore the medical expert's 
report to the Court contains, in having accepted the presence 
in my case of paranoia (insanity), a blow in the face of truth, 
which could hardly be worse. As I write this sentence I do 
not want to offend the medical specialist in the least; I do not 
doubt at all that his report was given in good faith. But this 
cannot prevent me, where the recognition of my legal capacity 
is at stake, from giving expression to my conviction of the 
objective error of the report frankly and without restraint. I 
will try to explain below how the report received its present 
content. 

(2) The second error is in the sentence under (3)b of the ex- 
position of the facts in the judgment, that I myself am con- 
vinced that my stay in Sonnenstein Asylum could only be to 
the advantage of my mental health. This sentence, it is true, 
appeared in my lawyer’s communication, but led me already 
last summer to protest against its incorrectness; I reproduce 
verbatim the passage concerned from the letter which I wrote 
on 14th June 1900 to my lawyer: 


“As I am writing to you I do not want to omit adding 
that the consent which I expressed in my letter to you 
of 24th May of this year to the content of the communi- 
cation which you have handed to the Court, requires 
certain modification which at that time I did not con- 
sider necessary because in my opinion it was without 
importance for the legal assessment of the case. I refer to 
the passage that I myself consider my stay in the 
Asylum as one which could only be to the advantage of 
my mental well-being. This is not quite true. I am not 
pursuing my release from the Asylum at the moment 
for the only reason that having spent six years in it, it 
matters little whether I spend another six or twelve 
months here, and in any case my return to my previous 


ADDENDA 


domestic life with regard to living conditions, etc., re- 
quires certain preparations. On the other hand I do not 
expect any advantage to my health by extending my 
stay in this Asylum. In any case there can be no ques- 
tion of the return of mental clarity because this has al- 
ways been present undiminished; the hyper-excitability 
of my nerves can however not be removed by human 
means; it will continue to the end of my life because it is 
connected with supernatural matters, unless some 
change should occur in my body which would also open 
the eyes of other human beings. 

Naturally, however, I do not wish to spend the whole 
of the rest of my life in an institution where my mental 
powers lie almost fallow and where I am almost totally 
without contact with educated people, as well as all the 
other pleasures of life. Should certain nuisances (like the 
bellowing) continue to give concern as regards my ap- 
pearing in public, I would know how to restrain myself 
in such circumstances. 

I leave it to you to decide whether a copy of this letter 
is added to the files for the orientation of the Court.” 


Since the Court in the final judgment of 13th April last was 
—to my greatest surprise—guided by considerations of which 
there were not the slightest indications in the resolution on 
the evidence of 15th June 1900 which in my opinion was es- 
sentially correct (the resolution on the evidence followed 
almost verbatim the wording I had myself suggested in a letter 
of 4th April 1900—Appendix A in the file of 16th May 1900) I 
must express lively regret that my letter of 14th June 1900 re- 
produced above was not also brought to the notice of the Court. 
Had it been, the disputed passage could not possibly have been 
incorporated unchanged in the facts of the judgment. 





Addendum C 


II 
CONCERNING THE GROUNDS OF 
THE JUDGMENT. 


The grounds of the contested judgment rest mainly on the 
medical specialists second report of 28th November 1900; 
most of it was taken word for word from this report, so that in 
my refutation I can also limit myself in the main to a discus- 
sion of how far its conclusions are to be regarded as correct. 

Only a few points are independent additions of the Court; I 
will try to deal with these first, before I concern myself more 
closely with the content of the report itself. 

I accept entirely the remarks in the judgment referring to 
the fact that there is no reason for concern about my endanger- 
ing my life if freedom over my person were granted to me, 
and that otherwise also my mental faculties are unclouded, 
and that the so-called attacks of bellowing can remain out of 
consideration because pure police matters could not furnish 
grounds for upholding my tutelage. 

Another consideration raised by the Court is to be found 
in the sentence at the end of the judgment, namely that I 
suffer from hallucinations as a result of which I believe I can 
see human beings before me which do not exist (“fleeting- 
improvised-men”). If one takes the trouble to read carefully 
those parts of my Memoirs dealing with this matter, this con- 
sideration at once proves invalid, as it is expressed in the pres- 
ent tense “the appellant believes he sees human beings before 
him,” etc. The whole idea of the “fleeting-improvised-men” 
belongs to a time which lies years behind me; it only existed 
during the first year or two at the most of my stay in this 
Asylum. This can be clearly read at the beginning of Chapter 
16 of my Memoirs. I can therefore leave the question open 
whether my ideas concerning this matter rested only on hallu- 
cinations or on factual events. It is a question only of earlier 


(> eel 
353 
a 


ADDENDA 


phases of my illness as the medical specialist rightly states— 
perhaps on page 8 of his later report; I can only cite from the 
copy before me but it should not be too difficult to find the 
corresponding place in the original which is now in the Court 
file—which need not be taken into consideration in assessing 
the present state. I have known for a long time now that people 
I see before me are not “fleeting-improvised-men” but real hu- 
man beings, and that I have to conduct myself towards them as 
a reasonable human being usually does in his dealings with 
other human beings. The sentence at the end of the judgment 
that because of these earlier ideas there is danger of my acting 
unreasonably, can therefore be eliminated as a notable support 
of the Court's decision. 

I now turn to a discussion of the medical reports. These 
start a priori from the tacit assumption that everything I re- 
ported in my Memoirs or otherwise mentioned about the con- 
nection which has arisen between God and myself, as well as 
about divine miracles which happen to my person, rests only 
on pathological imaginings. If I wanted to give expression to 
my true feelings on this point of view I could only do it with 
Huss’ cry to the wretched peasants who were carrying wood to 
his funeral pyre: Oh sancta simplicitas! 1 do not mean to be 
impertinent to the medical specialist; I would be genuinely 
sorry if Dr. Weber felt insulted by any of my words, for I have 
the highest regard both for his character and professional and 
scientific capacity. I know he could do no other than apply to 
my case the yardstick of common scientific experience. On the 
other hand IJ also hope that he will not take it amiss if I give 
sharp expression to my contrary view. I must state therefore: 
the certainty of my knowledge of God and the absolute con- 
viction that I am dealing with God and divine miracles tow- 
ers high above all human science. This may sound distinctly 
presumptuous; but I know that the basis of this conviction is 
not personal vanity nor morbid megalomania. Irrespective of 


354 
L 





Addendum C 


my undoubted rich gifts in many directions I have never been 
blind to my shortcomings, I have never imagined myself 
among the foremost minds of the nation; after all it was not 
my merit that in consequence of a miraculous concatenation 
of circumstances, insight into the true state of divine matters 
was granted me in an incomparably higher degree than any 
other human being before; I have had to pay dearly enough for 
this insight with the loss of my whole happiness in life for a 
great many years. But all the more certain for me are the re- 
sults won by this insight; in fact they have become, and indeed 
must be, the very center of my whole life as God even now 
daily and hourly, I can even say at every moment, reveals 
Himself anew to me in His miracles and in His language. This 
accounts for my continual serenity, despite all calamities to 
which I am even now exposed, and which anyone can observe 
in my contacts with other people, even with uneducated peo- 
ple and children—only not with lunatics; from it springs also 
the quiet feeling of good will which I extend even to those who 
in earlier years unwittingly hurt me; it also explains the im- 
mense value I place on the publication of my Memoirs. For 
should I thereby succeed only in arousing in other people a se- 
rious doubt whether it had not been granted me to throw a 
glance behind the dark veil which otherwise hides the beyond 
from the eyes of man, my work would certainly still belong to 
the most interesting ones ever written since the existence of 
the world. 

I could not deny myself emphasizing with some vigor my 
basic point of view before going into all the details, because 
the judgment as well as the report think they can treat me 
somewhat condescendingly—not entirely without justification 
as I have admitted myself, as both represent State Authorities. 
Of course I have to realize that for the time being there is little 
prospect of other people appreciating my basic point of view, 
least of all in the decision of the present Court case. I therefore 


erat 
355 
ed 


ADDENDA 


used to consider it possible and indeed advisable to exclude 
every discussion of my supposed hallucinations and delusions 
from the points at issue in the case, the purpose of which is the 
contesting of my tutelage; I could not ignore the fear—as al- 
ready mentioned in my letter to the Director of the Asylum of 
24th March 1900—that the attention of the Court would be di- 
verted from the decisive and only question in their compe- 
tence, namely whether I possess the capacity for reasonable 
action in practical life. More recently however I have not been 
able to ignore the fact that it would be impossible for me to do 
so without a certain appreciation of my so-called delusions or 
my religious beliefs, and not only on the formal side of their 
logical sequence and orderly arrangement, but to a certain de- 
gree also regarding the question whether it is within the 
bounds of possibility that my delusional system, as one is 
pleased to call it, is founded on some truth. I have to make the 
attempt as regards other people, my Judges in particular, not 
really to convert them to my miraculous belief—naturally I 
could only do this at present to a very moderate degree—but at 
least to furnish the general impression that the experiences 
and considerations laid down in my “Memoirs” cannot simply 
be regarded as a quantité negligeable, as empty fantasy of a 
muddled head, which from the outset would not justify the ef- 
fort of further thought and possible observations on my per- 
son. Only in this way will it perhaps be possible to explain to 
the Court that petty considerations, ordinarily decisive for hu- 
man beings, such as the sensibilities of others, fear of revealing 
so-called family secrets, indeed even fear of a penalty, can only 
carry very little weight in my case, where the achievement of a 
holy purpose is at stake, which I must regard as my life’s task. 

In what follows I will therefore mention (and perhaps later 
put to proof) a number of points which, although they cannot 
exactly prove the reality of the stated miracles, will I hope at 
least make them so far credible that one will hesitate to 


356 





Addendum C 


condemn the whole presentation as pure nonsense from the 
start, but rather admit that the scientific world could make 
them the starting point of further researches. It is true, only a 
few points can be made and these deal mostly with apparently 
insignificant external events; for it lies in the nature of the 
matter that by far the largest part of the supernatural impres- 
sions which I receive in overwhelming number are only per- 
ceived by myself, and cannot be observed in any external signs 
by other people. Nevertheless the little I wish to put forward 
could suffice to cause astonishment in any unbiased person. 


(1) In the course of the years a quite extraordinarily large 
number of strings have broken on my piano—and I maintain 
through miracles. They amounted perhaps all in all to thirty 
or forty; the exact number does not matter much. In the year 
1897 alone the bill for broken strings came to 86 marks. 
Perhaps the opposing party in the case, the Royal Prosecuting 
Authority, will not dispute this fact; if they did I would be ina 
position to prove it by calling as witnesses my wife, the atten- 
dant Mobius and the music shop C. A. Klemm in Dresden, as 
well as perhaps a supporting statement in a further report from 
the Director of the Asylum. Concerning my assertion that 
they could not possibly have been broken by any foolish ac- 
tions on my part (hammering on the piano}, I wish to point out 
what was said in the middle of Chapter 12 of my Memoirs; in 
order to avoid repetition I refer the reader there. I am sure 
every expert would confirm that even using great force one 
could not break the strings of a piano by merely hitting the 
keys; if need be I could ask for an expert's report. If this is so, 
and it is altogether extremely rare for piano strings to break—it 
had never happened to me previously in the whole of my life 
and I have never heard of it happening to other people; it might 
happen in concert rooms where there are gross changes in 
temperature, perhaps in the case of excessively taut strings of 


oa 
357 
tsa 


ADDENDA 


string instruments, but even there hardly in the case of the 
strings of a concert grand piano—how then can one explain 
the remarkably large number of such breakages which hap- 
pened to my piano Could a natural cause be responsible 
(2) Very noticeable to my whole environment are the so- 
called attacks of bellowing which have for years—not in the 
first years of my illness—occurred very frequently. I have al- 
ready described their nature in my letter to the Director of the 
Asylum of 24th March 1900, in that the muscles which serve 
respiration (the lung and thorax muscles} are by divine miracle 
set in motion with such violence that J am compelled to let 
out the bellow or cry, unless I make quite extraordinary efforts 
to suppress it, which by the suddenness of the impulse is 
not always possible, or possible only by constant attention to 
it. I refer the reader to (2} of Chapter 15 of my Memoirs con- 
cerning the purpose which in my opinion is intended with this 
miracle. That I neither simulate nor provoke the bellowing 
purposely—it is after all a hard burden for me too—is ap- 
parently not doubted by the medical specialist (compare the 
later report, pp. 28 and 31 of my copy); he recognizes that it 
frequently requires the greatest effort on my part to prevent 
the bellowing noise, and that such noisy outbursts occur 
completely against my will, automatically and compulsively. 
I must therefore raise the question: has science in any way 
a satisfactory explanation for this phenomenon: Is any case 
known in the annals of psychiatry of a human being suffering 
from a mental illness (paranoia), assumed to be my illness, 
who is at the same time recognized to be of high intelligence, 
with unclouded mental faculties, of tactful and decent behav- 
ior in social conversation, with ethically correct conceptions, 
etc., and whose whole nature shows no tendency to coarseness 
in any way, in whom such automatically caused loud out- 
bursts or attacks of bellowing have been observed—which 
the medical specialist calls humming, clearing the throat and 


[al 
358 
ee 





Addendum C 


short attacks of laughter when they occur in milder form? 
Naturally I have not sufficient experience of other mental pa- 
tients, but I presume these questions must be answered in the 
negative. If this assumption is correct I would value confirma- 
tion by its inclusion in the report. Naturally I do not expect 
the medical specialist to adopt positively my explanation of 
the phenomenon, that it is the result of miracles, but even the 
negative, i.e. that one is dealing with a quite remarkable case, 
unique in the field of psychiatric experience, would in my 
opinion not be without influence on the judgment of my case, 
as one would thus give some credit at least to the possibility of 
the influence of supernatural forces. This point of view would 
appear all the more noteworthy if the medical specialist could 
further confirm that the attacks of bellowing almost never oc- 
cur when I am engaged in loud conversation, am in educated 
company or move outside the Asylum, on steamships, rail- 
ways, public places, or in the streets of the town, etc., but in 
the main are only observed when I am alone in my room or in 
the Asylum’s garden among lunatics with whom conversation 
is impossible. If science had to admit that here also it lacks ad- 
equate explanation, then one could not avoid attributing a cer- 
tain importance to my exposition of the matter. According to 
this it is a question of miracles; all these phenomena are easily 
explained by the rays (in other words God) being as a rule only 
tempted to withdraw from me when I am not thinking or 
when visual impressions which particularly attract the rays 
are not available in me. Such visual impressions are never 
lacking during excursions in the streets of the town for in- 
stance where I can look at shop windows, and where there are 
always many people about, particularly female persons, etc. 
(compare for details the first third of Chapter 15 of my 
Memoirs, also Postscripts II] and V of the Memoirs near the be- 
ginning of the last paragraph). 

(3) In the new medical report (page 28 ff. of the copy before 


ADDENDA 


me} it is stated—a point with which I completely agree with 
certain reservations—that I appear even at meal-times “preoc- 
cupied,” stare rigidly in front of myself (more correctly sit 
with eyes shut), “grimace” in a peculiar manner, and in partic- 
ular that I try to push my eyelids upwards; the medical expert 
thus admits that these had previously been closed and he can 
hardly mean that I push my eyelids up with my hands, but by 
using the muscles contained in the eyelids. 

The medical expert deals with these “hallucinatory pro- 
cesses” and the “striking reaction” caused by them only from 
the point of view to what extent these “pathological processes” 
constitute a disturbance in social relations. For me they have 
an incomparably greater significance: as signs which other 
people can also observe, of my whole musculature being ex- 
posed to certain influences which can only be ascribed to 
forces working from outside, in other words to divine miracles. 
I could add other phenomena to those mentioned by the med- 
ical expert, for instance that at times I suffer from being hard 
of hearing for a few minutes, that at times even when I remain 
quite still a severe acceleration of respiration occurs, so that 
literally I have to gasp for air and my mouth is kept open in 
a most unnatural manner, etc., etc. All these events can be 
noticed by anybody observing me attentively; it therefore 
sometimes requires an enormous mental effort to join in social 
conversation freely and good-humoredly; no human being has 
any idea of what goes on at the same time in my head and in 
my whole body. 

But it is not unknown to me that hallucinations, that 
is to say auditory stimuli causing voices to be heard, and 
convulsive twitchings, that is to say cramp-like contractions 
of the musculature particularly of the face, are not exactly 
rare accompaniments of a morbid nervous state. But I be- 
lieve I can maintain, and count on confirmation from the 
expert’s report, that the manifestations in my case deviate 


= 
360 
1% 





Addendum C 


so markedly from what is usually observed, that one could 
hardly avoid regarding their cause also as something essen- 
tially different. 

I have dealt in detail with my hallucinations in Postscript 
IV of my Memoirs, and I refer to it at this juncture. From the 
medical specialist’s report I notice with some satisfaction that 
he himself attributes a certain reality to my hallucinations, in 
so far as he apparently does not doubt that the “voices” de- 
scribed in my Memoirs are in fact perceived by me. The only 
difference of opinion then is whether the subjective sensation 
of hearing voices is caused only by pathological functioning of 
my own nerves, or whether some external cause acts on them, 
in other words whether the sound of voices is, so to speak, a 
trick on the part of my own nerves, or whether some being 
outside my body speaks into me in the form of voices. Equally 
the question may be raised concerning "grimacing,” the 
pulling of faces, closing of my eyes, etc., whether it is only a 
pathological state of my nerves causing muscular contractions 
or whether there is some external stimulus acting on my body. 
In essence it is one assertion versus another. Mere rationalism 
will naturally deny from the start that divine miracles are the 
cause. But happily rationalism, in Goethe’s words, “What can- 
not be accounted for, does not count,” is almost nowhere in 
science the guiding principle. I who cannot prove the miracles 
but only wish to put other people in a frame of mind to believe 
in the possibility of supernatural influences in connection 
with my person, I would be satisfied if the medical specialist 
were to affirm that in my case these phenomena have a charac- 
teristic and distinct stamp hitherto unknown in scientific ex- 
perience. I presume that hallucinations of the kind described 
have never previously been observed except in my case, partic- 
ularly the incessant talking of voices which cannot be silenced 
by any mental distraction, is something totally unheard of, as 
are the muscular contractions against the patient’s will (as 


eee 
361 


ADDENDA 


even the medical expert admits) which force him to shut his 
eyes, to utter bellowing noises, markedly accelerate his breath- 
ing even while at rest, etc. I would also like to see this assump- 
tion confirmed in a definite medical statement, unless it can 
be shown to be incorrect. It would be of particular value to me 
if the medical expert could also confirm that closing of my 
eyes—against my will-—occurs regularly and immediately as 
soon as I am silent after taking part in a loud conversation, in 
other words when I indulge in thinking nothing. 

(4) I am convinced that certain manifestations can be ob- 
served on my body which are totally inexplicable by the com- 
mon run of scientific experience; I might consider demanding 
a physical examination by the doctors of this Asylum or 
other doctors, perhaps including if feasible the application of 
Réentgen-Rays in order to ascertain this state of affairs. The 
matter concerns mainly, but not exclusively the so-called 
nerves of voluptuousness with which I have dealt in detail in 
Chapter 21 of my Memoirs. There is a passage in the later re- 
port of the medical expert (p. 22 of my copy) where it is stated 
that “I thought I could feel nerves of voluptuousness on my 
body like those of a female body, although science does not ac- 
knowledge the presence of nerves of voluptuousness.” I cannot 
really tell whether the medical expert was only relating my 
own statement in this matter or whether he was expressing his 
opinion that science does not acknowledge the existence of 
special nerves of voluptuousness which are differently distrib- 
uted in the male and female body. In any case it appears to me 
that this is merely a play with words without any bearing on 
the issue itself. Surely the medical expert would hardly wish 
to doubt—at least I have understood him to that effect in a ver- 
bal conversation, and besides consider it a scientifically estab- 
lished fact—that the nervous system of the female sex shows 
certain characteristics over the whole body particularly the 
bosom, connected with the sensation of voluptuousness, quite 





Addendum C 


different from those of the male sex.” It is immaterial what one 
calls these characteristic structures; if as a layman in neurol- 
ogy I chose the wrong expression, it would not matter much. I 
assert therefore that on my body, particularly on my bosom, 
there are present the properties of a nervous system correspon- 
ding to a female body and I am certain that a physical exami- 
nation would confirm this. The conclusions to be drawn from 
this are considered in detail in Chapter 21 of my Memoirs. 

At this point I wish to mention, in order to avoid any mis- 
understanding (which I will deal with more closely later}, that 
I would demand such an examination for purposes of the pres- 
ent Court case only, that is in order to obtain rescinding of my 
tutelage. As soon as I shall have achieved my freedom, though 
I would permit such an examination at the request of selected 
experts, I would never initiate it myself and much less spend 
as much as one penny of my fortune upon it. 

(5) The medical expert acknowledges (p. 9 in my copy of the 
later report), that the “emanations of my pathologically altered 
psychic state” are not, as commonly in similar cases, meager 
and monotonous, but show a fantastically formed intricate 
structure of ideas very different from the usual way of thinking. 
Pursuing this remark, I plan to submit my Memoirs for exami- 
nation to specialists from other fields of experience, particularly 
theologians and philosophers. This would serve a double pur- 
pose, firstly to prove to the Judges that my “Memoirs,” how- 
ever strange much of their content may be, could yet form an 
appreciable stimulus to wider scientific circles for research in 


———— 


* To elucidate this matter further, the following questions might be raised: what 
are the physiological peculiarities of the female bosom, particularly what is its 
swelling due to in the years of beginning puberty? Is it only a strengthening of the 
musculature, collection of fat and suchlike, or is the explanation not rather to be 
found in a development of the nervous system in the female bosom which is 
specifically different from that of the male sex? 


=) 
363 
| 


ADDENDA 


a most obscure subject and make it understandable how lively 
my wish must be to have them published. Secondly, I would 
then welcome the expert opinion of men of science in the men- 
tioned fields so as to ascertain whether it is probable, even psy- 
chologically possible, that a human being of cool and sober 
mind as IJ used to be in the eyes of all who knew me in my ear- 
lier life, and besides a human being who, as mentioned at the be- 
ginning of Chapter 6 of my Memoirs, did not have a firm belief 
in God and the immortality of the soul before his illness, should 
have sucked from his fingers so to speak the whole complicated 
structure of ideas with its enormous mass of factual detail (for 
instance, about the soul-language, soul-conception, Chapter 1 
and Chapter 12 of the Memoirs, etc., etc.). Does not rather the 
thought impose itself that a human being who is able to write 
on such matters and attain such singular ideas about the na- 
ture of God and the continued existence of the soul after death, 
must in fact have had some particular experiences and particu- 
lar impressions from which other human beings are excluded? 
The above is not intended as a formal application at present 
for such an expert report. For I cannot hide from myself the big 
expenditure in time and money which it would involve. Should 
the Court of Appeal decide to suspend my tutelage without it, 
I would naturally much prefer it. Should they, however, not be 
inclined to do this—and I will be able to orientate myself about 
this during the verbal hearings at some of which I hope to be 
present—I would reserve my right to make such an application. 


The matters discussed in the foregoing section have really only 
the importance of an arabesque around the real core of the 
question under decision, namely whether in consequence of 
my presumed mental illness I lack the capacity of looking after 
my affairs. 





Addendum C 


Turning to this question I must first make some more 
remarks about the characterization of my personality in 
the report. I acknowledge gratefully the medical expert's 
good will in doing justice to my whole personality; I am 
further indebted to him for not sparing the trouble of thor- 
oughly studying my “Memoirs”; it enabled him to give in 
his report a substantially correct summary of at least some of 
my main ideas. It was probably unavoidable that a few small 
errors and misunderstandings crept in, considering the inflexi- 
bility of the material; I do not have to enter into these more 
closely as they would hardly influence the Court’s decision 
in any way. 

On the whole I believe I am justified in asserting that the 
medical expert has only come to know me really well in the 
last year, that is to say since I have taken my meals regularly at 
his family table; his opinion about me after another six months 
of such contact would probably again be much more favorable 
than at the time of writing the last report. Before that time (that 
is to say perhaps before Easter 1900} the medical expert only 
became acquainted with the pathological shell, as I would like 
to call it, which concealed my true spiritual life. Nothing in 
these words is meant as a reproach for the treatment I received 
earlier on in the Asylum. I admit that during the first years of 
my stay in this Asylum I might have given the impression (al- 
though it was deceiving) of an imbecile unfit for social contact. 
I can also understand that the doctors retained this opinion 
which they had formed, for many years after my behavior had 
in many ways long shown a change in my mental state. It is 
impossible in a large asylum to devote uninterrupted and de- 
tailed observation to every single patient; in view of the intran- 
sigence I showed in the first years in this Asylum it was in fact 
difficult to get any correct impression of my mental life. Never- 
theless the statement in the report is not quite correct (p. 7 of 
my copy) that I showed no inclination “until such time,” that 


ADDENDA 


is to say until the demand for a new report was made (June 
1900), to move outside the Asylum and that the “desire” to ap- 
proach the outside world again had to be gradually “encour- 
aged” in me. There seems to be a small inaccuracy in memory 
here. I can prove from documents that in an exposition I person- 
ally gave to District Court President Schmidt, my official guar- 
dian, during a visit by him on 8th October 1899, I complained 
that for five years I had not been allowed outside the walls of 
the Asylum even for the small walks allowed to many other 
patients. In order to be loyal I sent a written copy of this expo- 
sition to Dr. Weber in a letter of 27th November 1899. Yet, af- 
ter that I had to wait four to six months before being invited to 
take meals at the family table and being given the opportunity 
of an excursion outside the Asylum (by carriage). I repeat I have 
no wish to recriminate about the past; I can however not allow 
the statement to go uncorrected that it was only my fault that 
one did not get to know me sooner as a human being in full 
possession of his mental powers and able to conduct himself 
correctly in decent society. In my opinion this would have been 
quite feasible since at least the beginning of the year 1897. 

In any case even the medical specialist himself, according 
to his report (p. 27 of my copy}, is now convinced that one need 
not worry about letting me take part in social intercourse, as 
well as in occasions where a great number of persons are gath- 
ered together, as at theater, Church, etc. The pathological events 
(grimacing, clearing my throat and suchlike}, which at times 
are noticeable even on such occasions, are as experienceshows, 
not of such severity as to be very disturbing to other people. 

The medical expert added to his account concerning my 
social behavior a further passage in which he somewhat con- 
tradicted the District Court at Dresden, which concluded in 
its decision of 13th March 1900 that I was capable of directing 
the most difficult Court cases, of drawing up a judgment to 
which no objection could be taken, etc. I quite agree with the 


366 
Mae eel 





Addendum C 


medical expert that what the District Court at Dresden says in 
this connection requires certain modification, but I wish to 
bring out more clearly than the report does in what it has to be 
modified. In my opinion I am capable in written expression of 
my thoughts of meeting every demand which my previous 
position as Judge of a Higher Court could make on me; even 
now I would credit myself with the capacity of drawing up a 
ny judgment or any other document which comes up in the 
course of a Judge’s work, to the satisfaction of the highest 
standards. For all miracles are powerless to prevent the expres- 
sion of ideas in writing; the occasional attempt to paralyze 
my fingers, though making writing somewhat more difficult, 
does not prevent it, and attempts at disturbing my thoughts 
are easily overcome by putting them down in writing during 
which one has a great deal of time to collect one’s thoughts. 
Things which I have written have therefore, since writing 
materials were again placed at my disposal and I was inclined 
to write, revealed at all times even in the first years of my 
illness a human being completely clear mentally. Things are 
somewhat different in expressing thoughts verbally. Here the 
miracles practiced against my organs of respiration and speech, 
in conjunction with attempts to disturb my thoughts, produce 
a marked interference. As I am still simultaneously preoccu- 
pied with hallucinations —the hearing of voices—I agree with 
the medical expert that such intense intellectual concentra- 
tion as is demanded in directing verbal Court proceedings, 
taking part in consultations of the Court, etc., would only be 
possible for me with great difficulty. It is therefore not a ques- 
tion of a lack of intellect, but that certain influences make 
prompt verbal expression of thoughts difficult; these in my 
opinion are due to miracles, but according to the medical ex- 
pert to purely pathological processes. 

So much to round off the total picture of my mental state 
which the medical expert furnished in his report. It now remains 


ADDENDA 


to answer the question of whether my assumed mental illness 
makes me incapable of looking after my affairs, that is to say, 
to act reasonably in practical life. 

In this connection I wish to mention again first that in my 
opinion the onus of proof lies with my opponent, the Public 
Prosecutor. As the law does not recognize mental illness in 
itself as grounds for placing a person under tutelage but 
presumes a mental illness of such kind that the person con- 
cerned is in consequence thereof prevented from managing his 
affairs reasonably, it is strictly speaking the duty of him who 
requests that a person be placed under tutelage to furnish the 
Judge with the required factual proofs. To advance vague ap- 
prehensions and generalities, such as that it is “completely un- 
predictable,” if freedom to dispose of my person and my 
fortune were returned to me, whether I might be led to some 
unreasonable actions through my delusions and hallucina- 
tions, is insufficient for treating a human being of my high 
mental and moral status, which one is forced to recognize, 
legally like a child under the age of seven. It would rather have 
to be proved on the evidence of factual experience gathered 
in the last few years that and in what way a tendency to unrea- 
sonable action in consequence of my delusions and hallucina- 
tions has been manifested. It is true that the possibilities for 
gathering such experiences are not present to the same extent 
in a person detained in an asylum as in a person who is free. 
Nevertheless it is not my fault that for years I have been de- 
tained in the Asylum and denied leave, after the real reason, 
that is to safeguard myself and other people from danger, had 
passed; on the other hand the increasingly greater freedom of 
movement which I have had for more than a year has in my 
opinion given sufficient evidence that one need have no fear of 
unreasonable actions if freedom of decision over my person 
and my fortune were fully restored to me. I have since then 
shared hundreds of ineals at the Director of the Asylum’s 





Addendum C 


family table, have gone on smaller and greater excursions on 
foot, by steamship or railway, to public places of entertain- 
ment, to shops, to Church, theater and concerts, not infre- 
quently without being accompanied by an attendant from the 
Asylum, and have been in possession of a certain, if limited, 
amount of money. Nobody will have noticed on these occa- 
sions the slightest sign of unreasonable action on my part. It 
never occurred to me to molest other people by telling them of 
my delusions and hallucinations; as an example, I think I can 
maintain that the ladies who sit at the family table of the 
Director of the Asylum have not the merest inkling of the ex- 
istence of these delusions and hallucinations, unless by chance 
they learnt of them some other way. It is true I gave some 
hints to my wife and my relatives, both verbally and in writ- 
ing. But this would be sufficiently justified by the close rela- 
tionship which should exist among married couples and near 
relatives and which does not allow one to hide from the other 
party anything that fills one’s emotional and spiritual life. Even 
this information was never pressed upon them, but mostly in 
answer to their special inquiries. The only thing which could 
be counted as somewhat unreasonable in the eyes of other per- 
sons is, as mentioned by the medical expert, that at times I was 
seen standing in front of the mirror or elsewhere with some fe- 
male adornments (ribbons, trumpery necklaces, and suchlike}, 
with the upper half of my body exposed. This by the way hap- 
pens only when J am alone, never as far as I can avoid it within 
sight of other people. The small acquisitions needed {also some 
sewing material and suchlike), which for the most part were 
obtained for me by Asylum officials, cost hardly more than a 
few marks, and therefore from the purely financial point of view 
do not come under further consideration. I have very good and 
important reasons for this behavior, however stupid or even 
despicable it may appear to other people. When I need mental 
peace I achieve by it—one cannot play the piano, read, write or 


ADDENDA 


occupy oneself in some other way intellectually the whole 
day—a marked decrease in the states of bellowing which are so 
excessively annoying to myself and my surroundings. The con- 
nection between the two will not be evident to other people 
without further explanation; anybody interested is referred to 
Chapter 21 of my “Memoirs.” As far as I am concerned this 
circumstance has been proved to my satisfaction beyond any 
doubt through several years’ experience, so that I cannot heed 
other people’s judgment as to whether or not these measures 
are appropriate. Even if people think the advantage exists in 
my imagination only, as doubtless many naturally will, they 
can at worst only see in this behavior an incomprehensible 
whim, the absolute harmlessness of which cannot be denied— 
except perhaps in relation to my wife, a matter to which I will 
return in greater detail—as neither for myself nor for other 
people is it connected with any disadvantage. The danger of 
catching cold which the medical expert considers possible, cer- 
tainly does not arise at usual room temperatures, as the exam- 
ple of ladies in decolleté sufficiently shows. 

My wearing female adornments, etc., has obviously greatly 
influenced the opinions expressed about me in the medical re- 
port and the judgment; I have therefore had to deal with it 
somewhat at length. But it is the sole point with regard to 
which it can be said now, and could perhaps be said in the fu- 
ture with a certain degree of truth, that my behavior towards 
the outer world and particularly other human beings is influ- 
enced by my delusions and hallucinations. And so I come to 
that sentence in the report which in my opinion is its main- 
stay and therefore for me also the main issue which I contest. 
The medical expert says, four pages before the end of the report 
in my copy: 


“The most important moment in judging the capacity of 
the patient to look after his affairs is and remains the 





Addendum C 


fact that everything which objectively seen appears as 
delusions and hallucinations is for him (a) unshakable 
certainty and (b) adequate motive for action.” 


I have to confirm the first part (a) of this statement, namely 
that my so-called delusional system is unshakable certainty, 
with the same decisive “yes” as I have to counter the second 
part (b), namely that my delusions are adequate motive for 
action, with the strongest possible “no.” I could even say 
with Jesus Christ: “My Kingdom is not of this world”; my so- 
called delusions are concerned solely with God and the be- 
yond; they can therefore never in any way influence my 
behavior in any worldly matter, if I may use this expression— 
apart from the whim already mentioned, which is also meant 
to impress God. I do not know how the medical expert arrived 
at the contrary conclusion, namely that my delusions are suffi- 
cient motive for action; at least I do not think I have given any 
grounds for this belief either in my behavior or in the written 
expositions of my “Memoirs.” In them I have repeatedly em- 
phasized that I would practice what might appear to other peo- 
ple extraordinary behavior only “as far as consideration for my 
environment permits” (Chapter 13 of my Memoirs near the 
beginning) or “while alone with God" (Chapter 21 of the Mem- 
oirs, in the middle). What the law subsumes under the term 
“affairs,” that is looking after all interests of life particularly 
pecuniary ones, cannot be affected by my delusions and hallu- 
cinations. I have no intention whatever as the medical expert 
imputed and before him the lawyer Mr. Thiirmer, to make pe- 
cuniary sacrifices to propagate my belief in miracles, to have 
the nerves of voluptuousness in my body verified or to in- 
crease the “material well-being” which rests on them. Who- 
ever thinks this is possible has not really entered into my 
inner spiritual life; but naturally I do not intend any reproach 
with this statement, because a full understanding is really 


ADDENDA 


impossible for other people. The certainty of my knowledge of 
God and divine matters is so great and unshakable that it is 
completely immaterial to me what other people think of the 
truth or probability of my ideas. I shall therefore-—other than 
for the purpose of this legal action—never undertake anything 
by way of spreading my experiences and beliefs among people 
except publishing my Memoirs; apart from this I will not 
move a finger in order to prove them or make them seem 
likely. In this my point of view is like Luther’s: “If it is man’s 
work it will perish; if it is the work of God it will last.” I will 
quietly await whether unequivocal events will not compel 
other people to accept the truth of my delusions. The same 
applies to the “material well-being” mentioned by the medical 
expert or as I call it the increase of bodily well-being dependent 
on soul-voluptuousness. This must of necessity fall into my 
lap by itself without my having to do anything to bring it 
about; indeed it could hardly be expedited by advertisement. 
Particularly it would never occur to me to replace the few 
rags or cheap trinkets which make up my so-called female or- 
naments by anything which could appear even to a poor ser- 
vant girl as real ornaments or jewelry. I have not bought or 
made these objects for my pleasure, but in order to create a 
certain impression on God, and for this cheap almost valueless 
articles suffice. 

I trust one will believe all my assurances about my future 
behavior, as I have never given occasion for doubt in the sin- 
cerity of my love of truth. With it, in my opinion, all those 
fears are removed which could have exercised the minds of the 
medical expert or the Judges when it was stated that my behav- 
ior was “completely unaccountable” and that my delusional 
ideas might yet cause me to act unreasonably in some direc- 
tions not more closely specified. Therefore, only two possible 
points remain for upholding my tutelage which are specially 
dealt with in the Court’s judgment, namely that if my liberty 


5 
372 
te 





Addendum C 


to dispose of my person and my fortune were restored to me 
“my relationship with my wife would be destroyed,” and that I 
would compromise myself in front of other people or expose 
myself to the danger of a penalty through publishing my Mem- 
oirs. I want to go into these two points in greater detail in 
the following: 


(A) Concerning the first cause for apprehension, it seems to 
me that the remark in the judgment that through unreasonable 
actions “the relationship with my wife would be destroyed” 
advances a consideration which, although of great importance 
for the emotional life of the persons concerned, could hardly 
have a legal bearing on the question of my legal capacity. The 
marital partnership between myself and my wife has in any 
case for years almost completely ceased to exist in conse- 
quence of my illness and would, particularly if my tutelage 
were prolonged indefinitely, remain in abeyance until the end 
of the life of one of the partners. If the remark about the threat- 
ening destruction of the relationship with my wife is to make 
any sense at all, it can only mean that the feelings of respect 
and love which my wife still harbors for me could thereby be 
shaken and stifled. Clearly one is dealing with a most delicate 
matter, which third persons who have never known the inti- 
macy of that marital relationship should judge most carefully 
and hesitantly. Above all else I must emphasize most decidedly 
that a person can be placed under tutelage only in his own 
interest, in order to safeguard him from threatening dangers 
caused by his tendency to unreasonable actions; but a person 
can never be placed under tutelage in order to safeguard others 
however closely related from any annoyances, or to maintain 
them in a certain state of feeling; this may be of importance to 
their spiritual equilibrium, but does not belong to those affairs 
of life which are regulated by law. Apart from the vital interests 
of the person to be placed under tutelage, the care of relatives 


ADDENDA 


can only be taken into account in so far (compare the order 
of the Royal Ministry of Justice at the beginning of the judg- 
ment) as the person to be placed under tutelage is by law re- 
sponsible for such care, that is to say in the circumstances of 
the present case insofar as it is a matter of providing legal 
maintenance. I would never attempt to avoid this obligation 
including providing my wife with the necessary means of liv- 
ing apart from me, should circumstances turn out to be such 
that my wife could not be expected to live with me. If I were 
really so insensible to my moral duties towards my wife as to 
cast aside every thought for her health, her peace of mind and 
her natural feelings as a wife, I would give cause for doubt in 
the moral worth of my own person, but one could never de- 
duce therefrom grounds for denying my legal capacity. For if I 
were really so insensible as not to take the loss of my wife’s 
love as a misfortune, no other disadvantage could possibly 
arise from the extinction of this love; to employ her love in 
some manner for my physical or mental well-being, by caring 
for me physically, tending and nursing me, as well as by ex- 
change of intellectual interests—all this is in any case impossi- 
ble because of our actual separation. In the face of this my 
wife's visits and the presents she occasionally gives me hardly 
count; the latter I would easily be able to buy for myself were I 
master of my means. 

I think I have proved that everything said in the report and 
in the judgment about the “threatened destruction of the rela- 
tionship with my wife,” “damage to the marital state,” etc., is 
irrelevant for the decision of the present case. 

In order to appear in a somewhat better light to my Judges 
than I do from certain statements in the report and in the 
Court's judgment, I want to add a few more remarks about my 
relationship to my wife and the inconveniences to my present 
(and possibly future) environment arising from my so-called at- 
tacks of bellowing. All the statements in the report concerning 


Fabel 
374 
By yall 








Addendum C 


my relationship to my wife, based apparently on discussions 
between the medical expert and my wife, show gross misun- 
derstandings; but I will leave undecided whether my wife has 
misunderstood me (this could be possible because of the rarity 
of our meetings}, or the medical expert has misunderstood my 
wife. I have never played with the idea of divorce or shown 
myself indifferent to the future of our marital bond, as one 
might be led to believe from the expression used in the report 
that “I at once come out with the hint that my wife could di- 
vorce me.” The whole extensive correspondence which I have 
carried on with my wife for years would prove the true love I 
feel towards her and how painful it is for me that she too has 
been made most unhappy by my illness and the factual disso- 
lution of our marriage, and how much I always take lively in- 
terest in her fate. Only in this sense have I discussed the 
possibility of divorce, mentioning a few times to my wife that 
if it were impossible for her to maintain her previous love and 
respect for me because of a certain idea, naturally unsympa- 
thetic to her, which rules me and causes peculiarities in my 
behavior, she had the right according to law to start divorce 
proceedings because of mental illness persisting longer than 
three years. I always added that I would regret this very much; 
nevertheless I remarked to her that in such an eventuality she 
would naturally have no claim on the interest of my capital 
nor on the pension to which I am entitled by twenty-eight 
years in the service of the State. (My wife it is true has money 
of her own, but the greater part of the interest she draws comes 
from mine.) I have at all times had full understanding of the 
consideration I owe to my wife and have expressed it to her in 
the usual way. As example and proof I append footnote 76 of 
Chapter 13 of my Memoirs: 


“T must use particular discretion in contact with my 
wife, for whom I retain my former love in full. I may 


ADDENDA 


at times have failed by being too frank in conversation 
or in written communications. It is of course impossible 
for my wife to understand my trends of thought fully; it 
must be difficult for her to retain her previous love and 
admiration for me when she hears that I am preoccupied 
with ideas of possibly being transformed into a woman. I 
can deplore this, but am unable to change it; even here 
I must guard against false sentimentality.” 


I do not know how one came to assume that I would neg- 
lect that tact and fine feelings towards my wife for which one 
otherwise praises me. Naturally—and I have acted accordingly 
up to now—I would spare my wife any painful sight; I showed 
her my female ornaments only with some reluctance when 
out of forgivable feminine inquisitiveness she insisted upon 
it. In the same way I would naturally not expect my wife to 
live with me nor misuse my marital rights to force her in this 
direction, if experience should prove that living together with 
me is unbearable for her because of the so-called vociferations 
or attacks of bellowing. The medical expert therefore mis- 
judges me a little when he speaks of “pathologically increased 
egoism” in that I “do not give a thought” (!!) to how much 
my wife suffers “through my behavior” and also that I look 
upon the annoyance to my environment as irrelevant and 
complain only of my own malaise. Yet the medical expert 
acknowledges that the vociferations proceed compulsively 
and automatically against my will.” As far as these are con- 
cerned my wife does not suffer at all by them at present 





* This is not quite correct. As far as the vociferations are articulated words my 
will naturally plays some part. Only the inarticulate bellowing is really purely 
compulsive and automatic. I use loud words only at certain times because the 
inarticulate bellowing which would otherwise occur, would be even more disturb- 
ing to myself and my environment. 





Addendum C 


because she lives apart from me; if by speaking of “my behav- 
ior” one means my occasional putting on of female ornaments, 
I have already said above that I would never do so in my 
wife’s presence; but when I am alone I have the most cogent 
reasons for it. The assertion that I consider the annoyance to 
my environment as irrelevant and only complain of my own 
malaise, I deny only—not to be too discursive—by referring to 
a statement sent to the Director of the Asylum on 16th Oc- 
tober 1899, in which I stated: 


"IT am still subject to attacks of bellowing which I have 
repeatedly described to the Director of the Asylum. 
They occur at different times and occasions in very vary- 
ing strength and duration, but at times assume such di- 
mensions that I myself feel J could not show myself on 
the corridor without molesting the other patients. Some- 
times they even occur in the garden and last almost in- 
cessantly during the whole walk, in fact they occur 
whenever (to which I now add: but only then) I lack the 
possibility of talking with educated people, etc.” 


Besides, the nuisance caused by the bellowing or so-called 
vociferations is a matter for the police only, which, as the 
judgment itself acknowledges, must remain out of considera- 
tion in deciding the legality of my tutelage. Should breaches of 
the peace occur through my bellowing attacks when I am out 
of the Asylum which “could not be endured in a house shared 
with other people’—which unlike the medical expert I do not 
take for granted and which in any case would have to be 
proved by experiment—I would be sufficiently sensitive to 
the impossibility of staying outside a closed institution and 
would return to it of my own free will without there being 
any necessity for compulsion which could be employed on po- 
lice grounds. 


incre 
377 
(ee) 


ADDENDA 


(B) A second “example” how far my actions are subject to 
the compulsion of pathological ideas, is supposed to be fur- 
nished in the judgment I contest by my “Memoirs” and my 
wish to have them published. Surely in itself it is not unrea- 
sonable that a person should wish to bring to the notice of a 
wider circle the product of his mental labors. Every poetaster 
who has hammered out a few verses strives to have them 
printed and everybody thinks this is reasonable, even if the po- 
ems are obviously without any poetical value. Similarly my 
Memoirs might at first appear to the reader as muddled, fantas- 
tic, and not worth the printer’s ink. Nevertheless, it remains 
precarious to judge in advance whether a mental product is fit 
for publication or not; not even the authorities in the fields of 
human knowledge are always capable of such a judgment, 
much less individual persons: it would not be the first time in 
history for a new scientific discovery, a new way of looking at 
the world, a new invention, etc., to be ridiculed by its contem- 
poraries, mocked at and taken as the product of an insane 
mind, which later had to be granted more or less epoch-making 
importance. Nevertheless—so the Country Court informs 
me—my Memoirs are not fit for publication because in them I 
and my family are compromised in an unheard of manner 
which would expose me to the danger of criminal proceedings; 
because I use in them most offensive vulgar words, reveal the 
most intimate family secrets, and use insulting descriptions 
for people still living and highly respected, give without mod- 
esty an account of the most delicate situations and prove 
thereby that I have totally lost the capacity to distinguish be- 
tween the permissible and the impermissible. 

In reply I want to say first of all that my intention of pub- 
lishing my Memoirs is not to be understood in the sense that I 
will necessarily give them to the printer in their present form 
without changes. I did not write them with the purpose of 
publishing them. I mentioned this expressly in the “Preface” 





Addendum C 


(which can be read at the beginning of the “Memoirs”"). As this 
Preface contains in nuce my (anticipated) reply to the re- 
proaches in the—at the time not even existent—medical re- 
port and judgment, I append it here word for word. 


“T started this work without having publication in mind. 
The idea only occurred to me as I progressed with it; 
however, I did not conceal from myself doubts which 
seemed to stand in the way of publication: mainly con- 
sideration for certain persons still living. Yet I believe 
that expert examination of my body and observation of 
my personal fate during my lifetime would be of value 
both for science and the knowledge of religious truths. 
In the face of such considerations all personal issues 
must recede.” 


This is an indication that I will, in the eventuality of my 
“Memoirs” being printed, first check the content whether 
some parts could not be cut out without detracting from the 
whole, or some expressions rendered more mildly, etc. The 
possibility of my work actually being printed is by no means as 
remote as the medical expert assumes. When the latter says in 
his report (on the penultimate page of my copy) that I was ne- 
gotiating with a publisher “naturally so far without result,” he 
did not know that I had two letters in my possession from the 
publisher (Friedrich Fleischer in Leipzig} of the Sth November 
and 2nd December 1900, with a fairly definite promise that fol- 
lowing my discharge from the Asylum he would be prepared to 
co-operate in the publication of my “Memoirs.” 

Even if my “Memoirs” should be printed in their present 
form without any changes, I would have to deny emphatically 
that members of my family would thereby in any way be com- 
promised. My father's and my brother's memory as well as my 
wife’s honor are as sacred to me as to anyone in similar 


Boned 
379 
re 


ADDENDA 


circumstances who has the reputation of his near relatives at 
heart. I have not reported the slightest matter which could 
damage their memory or my wife’s name. It is a matter of giv- 
ing an account of pathological states in part most peculiar, 
which can never be taken as throwing any aspersions on these 
persons. As far as the danger goes into which I place myself by 
making my “Memoirs” public, “laying myself bare” or com- 
promising myself, I shoulder this risk in full confidence and 
with complete equanimity. The worst that could happen to me 
after all, is that one would consider me mentally deranged and 
this one does already in any case. I could therefore hardly lose 
anything. But I cannot convince myself that there is any fear of 
people thinking less of me after reading my “Memoirs” atten- 
tively. If sexual matters are widely discussed, this is not due to 
my taste or predilection, but rests entirely on the fact that 
these matters have played a very large role in the communica- 
tions of the voices that talk to me, and this again is linked 
with the fact that voluptuousness is closely related to the state 
of Blessedness of departed spirits—a fact hitherto unknown to 
other human beings (compare Chapter 21 of my “Memoirs”. I 
am sure nobody could say I have shown particular pleasure in 
vulgarities; on the contrary one cannot miss the moral serious- 
ness which pervades my whole work and which seeks no other 
goal but the achievement of truth; no one can avoid the im- 
pression that wherever it was necessary to be critical of God 
and divine matters, so to speak, I always anxiously endeavored 
to avoid any misunderstanding which could endanger the basis 
of true religion {compare Chapter 5 of the Memoirs towards 
the end, footnote 97 of Chapter 16 of the Memoirs, Postscript 
V to the Memoirs, etc., etc.). It is true that I used strong lan- 
guage occasionally; but these words did not spring from my 
own spiritual soil, but are used only as far as I can see, when I 
relate the content of a conversation the voices carry on with 
me. It is not my fault that these voices often use expressions 








Addendum C 


not fit for drawing rooms; to give a faithful picture I had to ren- 
der these forms of speech literally. I will give only one example 
as proof that the “strong language” used by the voices could 
not have been produced by my own nerves: that particularly 
offensive word beginning with f.... hardly passed my lips ten 
times in my earlier life whereas in the course of the last few 
years I have heard it ten thousand times from the voices. How 
could my nerves unaccustomed to using this word, suddenly 
without external influence be able to shout or lisp this word at 
me again and again? Besides, my Memoirs are not written for 
flappers or High School girls; no understanding person will 
therefore want to blame me if I have not always hit the form of 
expression which sensitive school matrons think fit for their 
charges. A person who wishes to pave a way for a new concep- 
tion of religion must be able if need be to use flaming speech 
such as Jesus Christ used towards the Pharisees or Luther to- 
wards the Pope and the mighty of the world. The surest proof 
of “my not compromising myself before other people” in any 
way, that is to say lose their respect by publishing my Mem- 
oirs, is afforded me by the behavior of the doctors in this 
Asylum, among them the medical expert himself. There can 
be no question—and the gentlemen concerned will tacitly 
agree with this—but that I have been treated very much more 
respectfully in this Asylum since the contents of my Memoirs 
became known and my intellectual and moral personality ap- 
preciated differently than had perhaps been possible before. 
Similarly I believe I would gain not lose in the moral evalua- 
tion of other people. 

But it is also said that I “used insulting words about persons 
still living and highly respected.” This can only refer to Pro- 
fessor Flechsig in Leipzig. It is however not true that I used in- 
sulting words about him; I request that one point out to me 
one single passage in my Memoirs where I have used one op- 
probious word about Professor Flechsig. It is only correct that I 


rouge) 
381 
ees 


ADDENDA 


have reported certain events which I must believe were true 
from the information of the voices that talked to me and 
which, if they were true and did refer to the human being 
Doctor Flechsig, could be calculated to lower him in public es- 
teem, and if they were untrue would be libelous. The danger of 
penalty could perhaps arise here. But I am fully alive to this 
risk and prepared to run it. To clarify my point of view I will 
quote two of my earlier written elaborations; both date from 
the time before the judgment, and before I was acquainted 
with the contents of the medical reports. In its entirety the re- 
port has only been available to me in the last few weeks (end of 
May to beginning of July 1901). I sent the following letter to 
the Director of the Asylum on 4th February 1901: 


“It is known to the Director of the Asylum that I am 
thinking of publishing my Memoirs and hope to do this 
after the order placing me under tutelage is rescinded. 
For a long time I was in doubt whether publication was 
permissible. I am fully aware that with respect to certain 
sections of my Memoirs Professor Flechsig in Leipzig 
could feel urged to prosecute me for libel or even demand 
the withdrawal from circulation of the whole book as 
constituting a punishable offense (§ 40, Str.G.B.}. Never- 
theless I have at last decided to proceed with publication. 
I know I am free from any personal animosity against 
Professor Flechsig. I have therefore only mentioned such 
matters concerning him in my Memoirs, which in my 
opinion are essential for understanding my thesis. I might 
erase the perhaps somewhat offensive and unessential 
footnote (erased) of my Memoirs in case of publication. I 
hope that Professor Flechsig’s scientific interest in the 
content of my Memoirs will outweigh possible personal 
susceptibilities. If this should not be the case, the impor- 
tance I place on the publication of my work, in the hope 


ee 4 
382 
eee) 





Addendum C 


of thereby enriching science and clarifying religious 
views, is so great that I would run the risk of prosecution 
for libel and the threatened financial loss in case of a 
possible withdrawal of my book from circulation. 

I do not make this communication to the Director of 
the Asylum to obtain an opinion whether a penalty is 
considered possible, but only to furnish new proof once 
again of how carefully I consider the consequences of 
any of my actions in advance, and so to demonstrate 
how little one is justified in maintaining that I am inca- 
pable of managing my affairs." 


I further added at the end of Postscript VI of my Memoirs 
the following: 


“In case this book should reach publication, I am well 
aware that there is one person who could feel hurt by 
such a publication: it is Professor Flechsig in Leipzig. I 
have already discussed this in detail in a memorandum 
of 4th February 1901 to the Director of this Asylum, 
the wording of which I reproduce here (the above follows 
here). 

I would like to add a few remarks to this. 

I naturally have to presume that Professor Flechsig 
has at least some recollection of the external events con- 
nected with my stay in the Nerve Clinic in Leipzig, of 
which he is Director. On the other hand I dare not state 
definitely that the super-natural events with which his 
name is connected and during which his name was and 
is still daily given to me by the voices, ever reached his 
awareness. It is of course a possibility that in his role as 
a human being he was and remains removed from these 
events. The question how it is possible to speak of the 
soul of a still living person as different from him and 


ADDENDA 


existing outside his body naturally remains mysterious. 
I am absolutely certain that such a soul or at least part 
of a soul did exist and still exists after experiences 
repeated a thousandfold. I must therefore also acknowl- 
edge the possibility that everything reported, particu- 
larly in the first chapters of my Memoirs in connection 
with the name Flechsig, is only to be taken as referring 
to the soul Flechsig as distinct from the living person, 
the separate existence of which although certain, cannot 
be explained in a natural way. It follows that I do not in 
any way wish to attack the honor of the living Professor 
Flechsig in my intended publication.” 


Little remains to be added to the statements repeated above. 
It is clearly evident that when I first resolved to publish my 
Memoirs I had the fullest understanding of the possible conse- 
quences which might follow such a step, and this appears to 
me the decisive moment as to whether the question of my le- 
gal capacity is to be answered in the affirmative or negative. 
Should I wish to add the martyrdom of a threatened penalty to 
the burden of the untold suffering which has already been 
mine for a holy purpose, no human being in my opinion would 
have the right to prevent me. I cannot wish that the knowledge 
of God which has been revealed to me shall vanish for ever 
with my death, whereby mankind would lose an opportunity 
of attaining truer conceptions about the beyond which may per- 
haps never occur again. Besides it is an open question whether 
Professor Flechsig would bring an action, and if he did whether 
such an action would lead to my punishment. In any case I re- 
fuse with due acknowledgment the protection planned for me: 
it would mean, in order to save me from a few months’ impris- 
onment at the most, locking me up in an Asylum for a lifetime 
deprived of freedom of my person and fortune. 


an) 
384 





Addendum C 


I could close the grounds of my appeal with the above; I 
believe I have refuted all the more important points which 
were made in the report and in the judgment upholding my 
tutelage. 

But a new moment concerning my health, which arose 
while I was writing this manuscript, causes me to make an 
addition, as my future plans cannot remain entirely untouched 
by it. Until now I lived in the belief that the sleeping drugs 
provided for me in this Asylum had no effect on my sleep, but 
that my sleep depended solely on the influence of the rays 
(compare footnote 31 in Chapter 5 and footnote 45 in Chapter 
7 of my Memoirs). I only took the sleeping drugs ordered 
for me because in this as in all other matters I submitted to 
the doctors’ orders. But several nights this month one tried 
to dispense with sleeping drugs altogether, with the result 
that during those nights I slept very little if at all. This could 
have been coincidence as there had previously been nights in 
which I slept badly. Nevertheless it now seems a possibility or 
probability that for the time being I cannot do without sleep- 
ing drugs. But this would not in the slightest influence my 
fundamental belief that my person is the object of divine mira- 
cles and that my sleep is primarily dependent on the union 
of all rays. Possibly I can only achieve the Jength of sleep nec- 
essary for human beings with the help of medicines. If this 
is really so, my plans for the future would of necessity have 
to be somewhat modified. J do not belong to the class of 
mental patients who insist constantly and vehemently on 
their discharge without giving any thought to how their life 
outside the Asylum would shape both for themselves and 
their environment. Further, my stay in this Asylum is at pres- 
ent not so unbearable that I would prefer a lonely life outside 
the Asylum to the present state of affairs—should it turn out 


Ins, al 
385 
at | 








ADDENDA 


to be impossible to live with my wife. I cannot even be certain 
whether a hired servant would put up with the attacks of bel- 
lowing should they occur frequently. As long as I need artifi- 
cial aid to sleep, I am satisfied to do the correct and sensible 
thing and stay under medical supervision; the simplest being 
to remain in this Asylum where I have now been for seven 
years. But while I thus give fresh proof of ample and reasonable 
circumspection, I must insist that my stay in this Asylum is a 
measure in the interests of my health—irrespective of police 
considerations—to which I give my free assent as a sensible 
human being capable of looking after his affairs. After all it is a 
point of honor: which person of my high intellectual standing 
would not feel it an indignity to be treated in legal matters like 
a child under the age of seven, to be denied every disposition of 
his fortune even in written form, and, what is more, to be pre- 
vented from obtaining information about his financial affairs, 
etc., etc. Great practical significance attaches to the matter 
over and above this. The need for sleeping drugs might pass 
sooner or later, the attacks of bellowing now giving rise to po- 
lice concern, diminish so as to be no longer a serious nuisance 
to other people. If such were the case, and I would then suggest 
a change, perhaps transfer on trial to a private institution, I 
would as long as I am under tutelage have to fear being sent 
from pillar to post with my request. The Asylum authorities 
and my relatives, as also my guardian and the judicial author- 
ity—the latter naturally can never be correctly informed about 
my state—could easily be tempted to shift the responsibility 
for my release or any change in my circumstances from one to 
the other. It is therefore of the utmost importance to me to 
deal in this matter only with the Asylum authorities, in whose 
insight and faithfulness to duty I have complete trust; but 
whom I cannot spare the burden to act on their own responsi- 
bility when keeping me against my will in the Asylum, and 
having this clearly in mind in all their decisions. 





Addendum C 


I close by repeating the hope that the medical expert will 
not take any of my statements amiss, as I have no intention 
whatever of offending him or denying him the high respect 
which is his due. 


SONNENSTEIN, 23RD JuLy 1901. 


Dr. Schreber, Senatsprdsident (retired). 


Dr. Weber’s expert report 


OF STH APRIL 1902 


O.1. 152/00. 


SONNENSTEIN, 5TH APRIL 1902 


To the Superior Country Court, 
Civil Division, 
Dresden. 


To be asked on 14th January 1902 by the Superior Country 
Court of Dresden, Civil Division, following the evidence of 
23rd December 1901, to furnish a further report on the mental 
state of President Dr. Schreber, is a task little congenial to me. 
I have been the appellant's doctor for some years, for a long 
time he was my daily guest at meals, for my part I regard the 
relations between him and me, if I may say so, as a friendly 
one, and it is my sincere wish that this man, so sorely tried in 
the past, will obtain that measure of enjoyment in life to 
which he thinks he is entitled after so much adversity. It has 
now fallen to me to render a conscientious report about his 
state as it appears from my observations, and thereby furnish 





Addendum D 


the material which might lead to the confirmation of his tute- 
lage which he is contesting, and the success of which is all- 
important for his future enjoyment of life. It is always possible 
that the disclosure of observations made in intimate contact is 
felt and interpreted as a breach of medical confidence, and al- 
though the physician is released from his usual secrecy to- 
wards the Court, nonetheless the free discussion of the 
patient’s morbid symptoms must always remain for the latter 
a touchy matter, not calculated to make the mutual relation- 
ship unconstrained and trusting as it should be. However ob- 
jective the medical expert attempts to be in his statements, he 
will never be able to make the mentally ill patient share his 
opinion in the objectivity of these findings, unless the patient 
himself were able to judge his condition correctly, whereby he 
would in fact show that he was not ill. 

I would therefore have welcomed if another expert had been 
ordered to give an opinion on this case from the factual evi- 
dence provided; in view of my position I have been particularly 
careful in my earlier reports to keep within my competence as 
medical expert as I see it. This attitude has been called unjusti- 
fied by both the appellant and the Crown; all the same I be- 
lieve I should adhere to this point of view, although in the 
ordinary clear-cut case the expert himself (and I am no excep- 
tion) usually draws the conclusions from the established men- 
tal illness or mental weakness for the sake of brevity. I refer for 
instance to Endemann’s exposition (Introduction to the Study 
of the B.S.C., 3rd Edition, p. 147 ff.), and believe I am justified 
in assuming from the content of the resolution on the evidence 
that the Court does not find fault with my point of view, as an 
expert declaration was not demanded from me as to whether 
the appellant is incapable of looking after his affairs in conse- 
quence of his mental illness, but only a comment on and a sup- 
plement to my previous report. With regard to the request for a 
supplement, I have somewhat delayed rendering this report in 


4 
389 
el 


ADDENDA 


order to be able to take into account events of more recent 
times when the appellant was able to move about more freely 
and had command over larger sums of money. 

In dealing with the resolution on the evidence I want to 
start with the question formulated in its third part, because it 
is a general one and answering it will throw light on some of 
the questions raised before. 

If it is said, perhaps with some exaggeration, that no single 
leaf of a tree is completely like another, this holds good to 
a much greater extent for the diseases of the human brain, 
insofar as it is the substrate of psychic function. It is so very 
complex an apparatus and developed in so varying degrees, 
that its disturbances show an infinite variety, the separate ab- 
normalities combine in infinite forms, and no individual case 
is therefore absolutely like another. This will at once be evi- 
dent even to the layman, when it is remembered how different 
the psychic individualities of healthy persons are, how much 
people vary in promptness and number of associations, in live- 
liness and depth of feeling, in energy of will and impulses, etc., 
so that one personality is hardly ever completely like another 
in all details. If one bears in mind that the original individual- 
ity has a marked influence on the form of pathological processes, 
that pathological ideas in form and content are bound to be of 
a different character in a person intellectually richly endowed, 
very knowledgeable and ethically prominent, compared with an 
individual inferior from the start, poorly developed and mentally 
dull, and if one further allows that the complicated machinery 
of psychic life can be disturbed in many different directions, 
the widest possible variations in the detailed elaboration of the 
pathological picture must result. But however varied and differ- 
ently colored the individual cases of mental illness may be, 
however characteristic and singular an individual case may ap- 
pear to careful observation, yet surveying the individual cases 
one cannot deny that among them certain groupings emerge, 


Gea 
390 
Lees 





Addendum D 


certain complexes of pathological manifestations, which in 
their development, course and outcome, in the involvement of 
single psychic functions are more or less clearly demarcated 
from each other; and on the basis of thousands of observations 
have led to the delineation of a certain number of different dis- 
ease forms. As colorful and inehaustible the individual varia- 
tions of cases of mental illness may be, as constant are the 
main outlines, and apart from the arabesques of the individual 
case the basic characteristics of the forms of illness are re- 
peated with almost surprising, monotonous regularity. 

Considered from this scientifically established point of 
view the appellant’s mental illness and its peculiarities, far 
from not being known to psychiatry, clearly belong to a well- 
known and well-characterized form of mental illness, para- 
noia, and shows all its important distinguishing features. But 
however common a mental illness paranoia may be, the pres- 
ent case is certainly not a usual commonplace one, just as 
little as the patient himself is the usual average individual. In 
paranoia more than in any other form of illness the original 
personality of the patient is of decisive importance for deter- 
mining the manifestations of insanity, and as long as second- 
ary dementia (a rare occurrence in paranoia) has not set in, the 
pathological products of an intellectually significant man with 
far-reaching knowledge, lively interest in scientific and philo- 
sophical problems, rich in fantasy and of well-trained judg- 
ment, will bear the stamp of the original intellectual 
endowments; but on the whole in the formation and system- 
atization of the delusional ideas, the disease will show the 
same character as that of another person whose range of ideas 
does not rise above the most trivial events of daily life. 

In my earlier reports I have already described the special fea- 
tures of the mental illness called paranoia, but because of the 
questions put to me! must repeat them briefly here. Paranoia 
is a distinctly chronic illness. It mostly develops insidiously 


f= 
391 


ADDENDA 


but can also start acutely with the signs of hallucinatory in- 
sanity, and after the stormy symptoms have run their course 
the slowly progressive course starts. It is characteristic of para- 
noia that delusions develop, frequently in connection with hal- 
lucinations and false memories, without the patient’s mood 
being primarily much affected, soon become fixed and elabo- 
rated into a persistent, uncorrected and unassailable delusional 
system, side by side with presence of mind, unimpaired mem- 
ory, orderliness and logic of thought. Whether the delusional 
ideas refer to the condition of the patient’s own body (the 
hypochondriacal form), or to the field of politics, religion, sex, 
etc., is without great importance for judging the total state. 
But it is characteristic that the center of these delusional ideas 
is always the patient’s own person, and that usually ideas of in- 
fluence, particularly of persecution on the one hand and mega- 
lomanic ideas on the other combine, and that mostly—at least 
for some time—the delusional ideas are limited to a definite 
group of ideas, while other spheres remain relatively intact. 
For this reason one used to separate a “partial insanity” and 
even if this term has now been given up, there is a certain 
amount of justification for it. It is true that every delusional 
system must somehow influence all the patient's ideas because 
its bearer is an “individual,” that is indivisible; this could be 
proved if we were able to follow in all detail a person's every 
idea in all its connections. But in fact it is impossible to do this 
and despite careful observation in not a few cases of paranoia, 
judgment in some larger complex of ideas, which are only in- 
significantly and indirectly related to the delusional system, is 
so little influenced by the latter that for practical purposes it is 
in some cases nil. It may help to understand this, if I give an 
example from healthy mental life. It is possible to be in lively 
scientific contact with another person for a long time, without 
gaining any insight into his religious convictions, because the 
latter have no close connection with his scientific views, 





Addendum D 


rather both complexes of ideas lead so to speak a separate exis- 
tence in his brain. But the time will almost inevitably come 
when we notice that even the scientific views have been influ- 
enced in a significant manner by the religious convictions, 
which up till then had not come to the fore, perhaps without 
the person concerned being aware of this influence. The case 
of the delusional system of a paranoiac is similar: unless spe- 
cially touched upon it will easily remain hidden from other 
people, and hardly be noticeable in his ordinary conduct, 
whereas in reality it forms the substrate of his mental life. It is 
therefore neither rare nor remarkable that paranoiacs although 
perhaps for a long time considered oddities, carry on their busi- 
ness sufficiently well and their professional duties in an or- 
derly manner, can even work scientifically with success, 
although their mental life is seriously disturbed and they are in 
the throes of a delusional system which is frequently quite 
absurd. Such cases are known in large numbers to every psy- 
chiatrist of some experience, indeed they illustrate nicely the 
special features of paranoia. In this always chronic illness the 
patient may be disturbed by some event in the modus vivendi 
he has maintained towards the outer world, his pathological 
ideas collide in some way with his environment, he exceeds 
the limits of what is tolerable in his actions, and thus he is rec- 

ognized as ill and treated as such. This is common experience; 

but it can hardly be denied that some cases of paranoia never 

reach the orbit of medical experience, but remain outside it, 

recognized perhaps only by their closest associates, and lead 

the ordinary life of a citizen without any marked disturbance. 

Without doubt the appellant's psychosis, in the form it has 

shown itself for some years now, belongs to this group of ill- 

nesses, although it did not, as commonly, start gradually and 
insidiously, but developed out of an acute stage. 

Following the demand of the Appeal Court in its resolu- 

tion on the evidence, that I deal with the appellant’s written 


iseumal 
393 
ZT) 


ADDENDA 


communications in the file, I wish to deal briefly with some of 
the objections the latter raised against my report. 

The appellant states {p. 118) that my report is based a priori 
on the tacit supposition that everything he made known about 
his contact with God and the divine miracles occurring on his 
body, is based only on pathological imagination. This is not so. 
Apart from the fact that I do not think I have anywhere used 
the expression “imagination,” I have in no way assumed a priori 
the pathological nature of these ideas, but rather tried to show 
from the history of the patient's illness how the appellant first 
suffered from severe hyperesthesia, hypersensitivity to light 
and noise, how to this were added massive hallucinations and 
particularly disturbances of common sensation which falsified 
his conception of things, how on the basis of these hallucina- 
tions he at first developed fantastic ideas of influence which 
ruled him to such an extent that he was driven to suicidal at- 
tempts and how from these pathological events, at last the sys- 
tem of ideas was formed which the appellant has recounted in 
such detail and so vividly in his Memoirs, the individual points 
of which I repeated as far as possible in my earlier reports. The 
appellant's legal representative is not quite correct when in his 
statement he suggests that the medical expert and the Judge 
saw in his “belief in miracles” and the complex of ideas around 
them only the basis for the assumption of mental illness, and 
that this cannot be so, as very many people believe in miracles 
without anybody thinking of declaring them mentally ill. What 
is usually called belief in miracles, the naive theoretical belief 
intentionally or unintentionally exempted from every criticism, 
that through His almighty will God sometimes causes events 
beyond or even against the laws of nature, does not apply in 
the present case. His ideas, as the appellant himself repeatedly 
stated and as their content clearly shows, do not emanate from 
a pious child's belief, but are contrary to his earlier opinions 
and undoubtedly due to pathological processes of the brain; 


fe 
394 
Le sed 





Addendum D 


they are evidenced by disturbances of common sensation and 
hallucinations and so belong to a category very different from 
the harmless “belief in miracles.” It cannot be expected that 
the appellant will gain the insight that these hallucinatory 
events (in the widest sense the muscular sensations described 
by the patient belong to them also} are entirely subjective; his 
expositions on page 164 ff. are aimed particularly at showing 
that his hallucinations are something very special, and at vin- 
dicating them by finding a basis in reality for them. But this is 
bound to be done by every hallucinating person, as otherwise 
he would not be suffering from real hallucinations. It is their 
characteristic that they are taken for factual and real and have 
the same acuity as other sensations. It would be wrong to say 
that it was as if the hallucinating person saw or heard some- 
thing he does really see and hear, and it would be a waste of 
time to argue with him about the reality of his impressions. “If 
what I perceive should be erroneous,” said one patient, “then I 
must also doubt everything you say to me, in fact I must doubt 
whether I see you.” It would perhaps be going too far to enter 
further into the subject of hallucinations here, and would serve 
little purpose in the present matter; it only remains to add 
briefly that in hallucinations the inner abnormal state of exci- 
tation of the apperceiving brain apparatus brings to the indi- 
vidual’s consciousness what in normal circumstances is only 
produced by external impressions, that is to say sensations; a 
process one can also describe by saying that the hallucinating 
person does not apperceive the world, but himself, i.e. events 
in his own central nervous system. That hallucinations usually 
gain much greater power over the total content of patients’ 
consciousness than real perceptions is not only due to their dis- 
tinctness as sensations, but also to the fact that they fit in with 
the direction of the dominant complex and grow on the same 
soil as those perhaps still obscure and unclear trends of thought 
by which in turn they are mightily fostered and fortified. 


ise Becel 
395 
(ee 


ADDENDA 


There can be no doubt that the appellant was and still is hallu- 
cinated, and his hallucinations and delusions (subjective patho- 
logical interpretation of real events) are not markedly different 
from those of very many other patients, only they have been 
shaped according to his individuality. The doubt which he has 
expressed whether such continuous hallucinations have ever 
previously been observed is without foundation; they are fre- 
quent enough even if rarer than the intermittent cases. 

Equally there is no foundation for the statement that “attacks 
of bellowing” have never been observed before. Among so-called 
catatonic patients that automatic uttering of inarticulate sounds 
or endlessly repeated words is not rare, and I have also observed 
it in paranoiacs. For instance, there was for a number of years 
among my patients a gentleman of good family, of exceptionally 
good mental endowment and unusually wide education, who 
was ruled by the delusional idea that people he had known pre- 
viously, particularly those he thought unfriendly towards him, 
were locked up in the hollow walls of his house and were from 
there annoying him by insulting jeering remarks, etc. This para- 
noid patient, who behaved in an orderly manner, was very en- 
tertaining socially, and had quite a successful poetical streak, 
used to repeat compulsively several times daily for half an hour 
without interruption very loud inarticulate sounds (“sounds of 
bellowing”) or abusive language, almost only when he was in 
his room—he called this “clearing his throat mentally.” 

I must further contradict the appellant’s repeatedly ex- 
pressed belief that I have changed my opinion about his condi- 
tion in the course of time, and as far as one could see would in 
the future arrive at yet a different opinion about him. It is not 
my opinion but the condition itself which has gradually 
changed and gone through markedly different phases. I have al- 
ready mentioned this in my previous report in detail, and in 
my opinion comprehensively, and do not think it is necessary 
to go into the whole process of development of the present 


cat 
396 
Se 


a ie 


- =» eee 


Addendum D 


state of illness again. Between his earlier state of being occu- 
pied by tremendous hypochondriacal delusional ideas, of se- 
vere hallucinatory stupor, of markedly negativistic behavior, 
characterized by refusal of food and turning away from every 
contact and occupation, and the present picture of sensible and 
sociable approachability, no longer shut off from the demands 
and interests of the day, there is a vast difference, a difference 
which is of importance naturally for appraising the total state. 
How much his condition has changed is also shown by the 
changes in his hallucinations. Whereas previously in form and 
content they were of a powerful nature accompanied by lively 
affect and therefore had a strong, direct influence on him, they 
have gradually become weaker and at present according to the 
patient's own graphic account (compare p. 166 ff.) are only a 
soft lisping noise, a hissing comparable to the sound of sand 
running out of an hour glass, while their content also is poorer 
and more scurrilous, the hallucinated words follow each other 
more slowly, the “voices” are drowned by an ordinary conver- 
sation and, though a nuisance and a burden to the patient, do 
not influence his feelings and thoughts to any great extent. 
This is, as I have said before because the acute stage of the psy- 
chosis with its vivid changes of feeling passed into a chronic 
state long ago; out of the stormy turbid flood of the acute stage 
of the illness the well-known complicated delusional system 
has crystallized out and become fixed and the patient has 
come to terms with it in the manner described above, so that 
to a certain extent it now leads a separate existence in his 
mental life, and although it represents a very important part of 
it, being less affect-laden it only acts and reacts little on the 
rest of his mind, particularly on that part concerned with daily 
life, and does not influence his actions significantly. 

That does not mean that it has no influence at all; in given 
circumstances it could easily make itself felt in trivial matters 
and lead to faulty conclusions. I will only touch on one point 


Ee Seal 
397 
(eae) 


ADDENDA 


on which the appellant asks for an expert opinion, namely his 
peculiar ideas about the male and female body which play a 
role in his delusional system. 

In his opinion the female body in contra-distinction to the 
male has “nerves of voluptuousness” everywhere, particularly 
on the bosom; he believes he resembles the female type in this 
and therefore has the corresponding sensations. He cannot be 
induced to give up this belief, although in actual fact “nerves 
of voluptuousness” are only present on the genitals, and the fe- 
male breast owes its form to the development of milk glands 
and the deposition of fat. 

Following these general remarks in answer to the last ques- 
tion in the resolution on the evidence, I now proceed to answer 
the first and more important question. 

It must first be stated that since the previous report was 
furnished the appellant has been granted gradually increasing 
freedom of movement in view of his general improvement. 
Whereas before he was only allowed to go on excursions, visit 
restaurants and places of public amusement, go shopping, etc., 
accompanied by an attendant, since the summer of this year he 
has been allowed out unaccompanied. At that time the appel- 
lant’s mother and sister took up residence in Wehlen nearby, as 
planned and arranged by President Schreber himself. For a 
number of weeks he visited them almost daily, often for the 
greater part of the day, without an attendant whose presence 
for obvious reasons would have been disturbing quite apart 
from the not inconsiderable expense involved. As no untoward 
incident came to the notice of the Asylum authorities from the 
omission of this precautionary measure, it was left in abeyance 
when his relatives departed. 

Since then the appellant has been granted absolute freedom 
of movement outside the Asylum without restriction except 
for having to conform to the order of the house. He has used it 
for making almost daily excursions on foot, by ship or railway 











Addendum D 


to visit places of interest in the neighborhood, partly alone, 
partly in company of one or other patient whom he had invited 
to join him, sometimes visited concerts, theaters, public 
shows, etc. He also went repeatedly to Dresden while waiting 
for the sitting of the Court, visited his wife and did some shop- 
ping. At the invitation of his relatives and with the agreement 
of the Asylum authorities he recently journeyed alone to 
Leipzig, returning yesterday after an eight days’ absence; from 
his sister's information the visit went off quite well. 

One must testify that in the appellant’s behavior on all 
these occasions there was never anything unreasonable or un- 
fitting. He always discussed frankly and openly his plans, if 
they were outside his routine, always made certain that the 
authorities were in agreement before he carried them out, and 
having obtained permission went ahead after careful planning 
and consideration of all circumstances, and always returned 
home from his excursions at the right time. Therefore I believe 
I am right in assuming that the appellant’s conduct in the out- 
side world was never incorrect. One disadvantage of the pa- 
tient not being accompanied by an attendant from the Asylum 
was that there were of course no longer reliable reports about 
his behavior outside the Asylum. His own accounts cannot be 
relied upon exclusively in this matter, although he is most 
truthful and would I believe never knowingly tell an untruth; 
but it has often been noticed that he understandably lacks ob- 
jective judgment of the repercussions and effects of his behav- 
ior. For instance the patient's nightly noisy outbursts not 
infrequently led to lively complaints by the neighborhood; 
when confronted with these he would not believe that he had 
caused such a disturbance and thought nothing of it. Realizing 
how noisy the patient is not only in his own room but in the 
rest of the Asylum and how striking his other peculiarities are, 
it is difficult to believe that he can altogether avoid being con- 
spicuous in other places, and indeed this is not the case. 


Gael 
399 
Se 


ADDENDA 


I have previously described the patient’s very striking 
symptoms even when in company during his daily meals and 
on other occasions, which any layman would consider patho- 
logical: not only the grimacing, screwing up of his eyes, clear- 
ing of his throat, the extraordinary position of his head, etc., 
but still more his occasional almost total distraction and ab- 
sent-mindedness, so that he does not notice what is going on 
around him, even recently—although only once—he could not 
restrain himself from letting out the well-known “bellowing 
sounds” at table, and thereby caused great consternation among 
the ladies present. At that time he was also so noisy during his 
wife’s visit that she soon had to leave. Eye witnesses further 
informed me that the appellant became noisy near the Asylum 
(on the steps) and was gazed at with astonishment in the 
streets because he was pulling faces. Finally I must not hide 
the fact that a citizen of Pirna last June wrote protestingly to 
me about “allowing in public” a patient who behaved like 
the appellant. This complaint seemed so exaggerated and was 
denied so convincingly by the patient that I was not inclined 
to give it much credence; indeed I have heard nothing similar 
since. 

Nevertheless, one cannot doubt that the appellant, unless 
his total state improves further, will be unable to avoid being 
a disturbance to his environment after his eventual return 
home owing to his abnormal compulsive motor impulses in 
the form of these noisy outbursts. This leads me to say a 
few more words about the appellant’s relation to his wife. It is 
understandable that he was pained when I referred to his 
“pathologically increased egoism” in this matter. Nothing 
was further from my mind with this remark than to disparage 
his ethical and moral feelings; I am fully aware of their undi- 
minished existence towards his wife as well; the accent is on 
the word “pathologically” and I only meant the egocentric di- 
rection of his thougits, which occurs in every patient and 





Addendum D 


makes events happening to him the center of everything, 
while the effect on other people is underrated because what 
they suffer at the same time is not appreciated. However that 
may be, there can be no doubt that in the existing circum- 
stances, unless there is further improvement, the behavior of 
the patient is such that marital union could only be resumed 
with a fair degree of self-denial on the part of his wife, which 
she might not be able to offer considering her own variable 
state of health. 

Since the appellant has been allowed full freedom of move- 
ment outside the Asylum he has also been given a somewhat 
larger sum (...marks monthly) as pocket money in order to 
cover his excursions and small necessaries. There has been 
no evidence that he squandered this money as a consequence 
of which it might not have sufficed. Nor was he particularly 
parsimonious, although he thought carefully before spending 
money, avoided expensive items and did not buy useless 
articles (apart, perhaps, from the previously mentioned small 
trinkets). From his wife’s repeated statements I have the im- 
pression that in her opinion the patient was spending rela- 
tively too much money; but as I do not know details of his 
financial affairs, I cannot judge whether these remarks were 
justified; nevertheless I think one will find that he did not 
spend in excess of his circumstances. In any case the appellant 
is thoroughly informed about his financial position and at 
present there is no reason to think he would exceed his means 
from some pathological motive and, if he had full powers of 
disposal, that he would squander his fortune. 

One cannot say that the appellant does not understand how 
to look after his health nor that he would damage himself by 
arbitrary actions. He is clean and looks after his person, eats 
sufficiently if not to excess, is very moderate in drinking and 
concerned to maintain his fitness and mobility by means of 
regular physical exercise. But from his drawn expression it is 


ADDENDA 


clear that the frequent, marked sleep disturbances—for which 
by the way he now only rarely receives drugs—as well as the 
states of restlessness and agitation occurring by day, have a bad 
effect on him generally. Only recently was it observed that 
when he was indisposed he acted very irrationally: he had an 
attack of indigestion with diarrhea and vomiting, in itself not 
serious, became greatly excited, saw in it a “divine miracle” 
and instead of staying in bed and adhering to a strict diet and 
taking the drugs prescribed, he was driven by his morbid men- 
tal processes to doing the very reverse (as far as possible) and so 
prolonged his indisposition. But as a rule he will not do any- 
thing which might influence his health adversely; the above- 
mentioned episode, however, shows how unaccountable his 
impulses can be at times through his morbid ideas. 

The appellant’s oft-repeated firm intention of publishing 
his “Memoirs” must also be regarded as pathologically deter- 
mined and lacking sensible consideration. It is unnecessary 
for me to enter into the details of this manuscript again—it is 
in the possession of the Appeal Court and its contents will 
have been carefully examined. Every impartial observer partic- 
ularly the expert would call this a very interesting presenta- 
tion of a complicated delusional system, but would regard an 
unabridged version “impossible” for publication as being both 
offensive and compromising for the author. But reasoning with 
him about the propriety of publishing it is hopeless; he sees in 
it the revelation of a new truth vital for the world and, though 
he renounces verbal propaganda, he wishes to make known to 
mankind through the printed word the knowledge granted him 
of God and the beyond; he is prepared to shoulder all personal 
unpleasantness that may arise. 

The Court will know best in how far to judge the foregoing 
deviations from the normal as a “tendency to unreasonable 
and wrong action” in the sense of their resolution on the 
evidence; but it is stressed from the medical side in agree- 


eae al 
402 
Es 





i 


Addendum D 


ment with the appellant’s legal adviser and with himself, that 
at present the pathological manifestations noticeable out- 
wardly concern mostly relatively unimportant fields, exert 
their disturbing influence more in intimate domestic and so- 
cial relations, and by their nature bear more on society and 
welfare-police interests than on the law; the patient’s most vi- 
tal personal interests, his health, fortune and honor, interests 
which could be safeguarded by the institution of a guardian, do 
not seem greatly endangered. Only with regard to the last- 
mentioned can his efforts to get his Memoirs published be re- 
garded as a harmful action. 

But the Court also wants to know under [b] of the resolu- 
tion whether in spite of the patient’s present favorable behav- 
ior, there are grounds for anxiety in the nature of the existing 
mental illness that the appellant might endanger the above- 
mentioned and other important interests of life through insen- 
sible and injudicious actions, as soon as the freedom of legal 
action is restored to him. In my earlier report I pointed to the 
fact that in the nature of so deep-seated an illness as paranoia 
it is impossible to predict whether and in what direction at a 
given moment the existing pathological ideas will influence 
the patient’s conduct; I also mentioned that many paranoiacs 
with a developed delusional system live in the world without 
difficulty, following their profession, until at a given opportu- 
nity they reveal their pathological condition by contrary ac- 
tions; I have given above an example of how much the 
appellant can be disturbed by external events and forced to in- 
appropriate action through his pathological revelations, and 
therefore I have only to repeat that even now it is not impossi- 
ble that the appellant could be influenced in his actions by 
pathological processes. When the appellant states (pp. 118 and 
119) that the insight gained into the true nature of divine af- 
fairs, the certainty that he is dealing with God and divine mir- 
acles, have become the center of his whole life, that God still 


403 
a | 


ADDENDA 


reveals Himself to him daily and hourly in His miracles and in 
His speech, that his constant cheerfulness of mood, his benev- 
olence towards people little worthy of it, etc., rest on this, then 
it is not likely that this mighty current of thoughts and feel- 
ings would never under any circumstances influence his ac- 
tions, particularly as even at present some of his actions are 
caused against his will directly by “miracles.” The appellant's 
assurances “that he does not permit his delusions to influence 
his affairs” can hardly alter this, as on the one hand he need 
not become aware of such influences and on the other the 
pathological processes may gain so much in strength that re- 
sistance becomes impossible. No assurance can therefore be 
given in face of the nature of the illness that important life in- 
terests of the patient might not be endangered were he freed 
from his tutelage. Two other points are important medically. 
Firstly, it is doubtful whether mere apprehension for the fu- 
ture, the possibility of endangering himself severely, is suffi- 
cient grounds for the assumption that he is incapable of 
looking after his affairs. Secondly, the danger for the future is 
now not great, because the sphere of the appellant’s delusional 
ideas has gradually become more sharply demarcated from the 
rest of his ideas, and has for some time led a relatively separate 
existence. Experience so far shows that his judgment and treat- 
ment of a number of important life interests were not signifi- 
cantly influenced by these complexes of delusional ideas, but 
have been carried out faultlessly. Present conditions do not en- 
title one to expect any great change in the appellant’s mental 
state, e.g. deterioration, in the foreseeable future. Apprehension 
for the future, therefore, need not weigh as heavily to-day as 
previously in judging the over-all situation. 


(signed.) Dr. Weber. 


Sal 
404 
fel 








Judgment of the Royal 
Superior Country Court 
Dresden 


oF 14TH JuLy 1902. 


O.1. 152/01. No. 22 


Pronounced Day of Exhibition 
14th July 1902 14th July 1902 
Signed: Dr. Forster, Signed: Diethe, 
Clerk to the Court. Clerk to the Court. 


F.X1 6894/02 


IN THE NAME OF THE KING 


In the case of 
Daniel Paul Schreber, Doctor of Law, Senatsprdsident, retired, 
formerly residing in Dresden, now in the Country Asylum 
Sonnenstein, 
Plaintiff and Appellant 
(Solicitor: Windisch} 
Versus 
the Public Prosecutor at the Royal Country Court, Dresden, 


ADDENDA 


now Public Prosecutor at the Royal Superior Country Court, 
Dresden, Defendant and Respondent, 

re: contesting the order placing plaintiff under tutelage, 
the Royal Superior Country Court of Saxony, with Judge 
Hardraht, President of the Senate of the Court, together with 
Counselors of the Superior Court Vogel, Dr. Steinmetz, Ni- 
colai, Dr. Paul, find: 


Appeal of plaintiff is allowed, and the judgment of the 
Seventh Civil Chamber of the District Court, Dresden of 
13th April 1901 confirming the order of the Lower 
Court, Dresden, of 13th March 1900 placing plaintiff un- 
der tutelage is rescinded. 

Plaintiff is allowed costs of the proceedings including 
those of the Court of Appeal. 


FACTS OF THE CASE 
(PLEADINGS AND EVIDENCE.) 


Plaintiff was placed under tutelage as an insane person 
at the instance of the Royal Prosecuting Authority by an order 
of the District Court at Dresden of 13th March 1900. The Dis- 
trict Judge declared that he was convinced by virtue of Dr. 
Weber's expert report in whose care plaintiff had been since 
1894, and by the impressions he personally gained by interro- 
gating the patient, that plaintiff was deprived of the use of his 
reason and therefore incapable of managing his affairs. He held 
that Dr. Schreber was dominated by delusions, that he consid- 
ered himself chosen to redeem the world and to restore to it 
the lost state of Blessedness. This however he could only do by 
first being transformed from a man into a woman. In this sex- 
ual transformation the patient imagined himself the object of 
continuous divine miracles, and believed he could hear the 





Addendum E 


birds and the winds talking to him, which fortified him in his 
belief in miracles. 

A person influenced by such delusions and hallucinations 
is no longer master of his own free will. He is subject to 
external influences independent of his own will, against which 
he is powerless and which render him incapable of managing 
his actions and affairs according to practical and reasonable 
deliberation. 

Plaintiff in due course contested the order placing him un- 
der tutelage by bringing a legal action for suspension of the or- 
der. He denies that he is in any way prevented from managing 
his affairs by the mental illness (paranoia) diagnosed by the 
medical expert: factual evidence of this assumption had not 
been produced by the District Court. It is merely a petitio prin- 
cipii when it is stated that: a person under the influence of 
delusions and hallucinations is not master of his own free will. 
What to the Court may appear as delusions has nothing what- 
ever to do with the question of his legal capacity; in any case 
his illness is not of a kind to make him incapable of judging 
correctly those matters of social behavior which in law are 
“his affairs,” even if one understands “affairs” in the broadest 
sense, that is to say including everything concerning: life, 
health, freedom, honor, family, fortune. In all these matters 
the clarity of his judgment was not clouded by his illness. 

Nobody would be able to say of him that he does not be- 
stow the necessary care upon his body and health. Although 
he admitted suicidal ideas in the first years of his illness, he 
says they disappeared long ago with the continual improve- 
ment in his condition. That he sets much store by his personal 
freedom and his honor was proved by his endeavor to free him- 
self from the shackles of tutelage; his sense of manly honor 
was hurt by being treated in law as an infant. He is on the 
best terms with his wife and his family and also has their in- 
terests at heart. Finally he is completely capable of managing 


4 
407 








ADDENDA 


his financial affairs himself. He feels he is as safe as every 
other person against being taken advantage of in business deal- 
ings. Even the District Court in the order placing him under 
tutelage held that he is still capable of presiding over a panel of 
Judges, of deciding the most intricate cases and delivering 
most difficult counsel’s opinions with striking juristical rea- 
soning. If this is the case it is difficult to understand why he 
should not be capable of dealing with the simple legal acts in- 
volved in looking after his own well-ordered finances. 

The Country Court ordered a delegated judge to interrogate 
plaintiff personally, and the Director of the Country Asylum, 
Sonnenstein, Dr. Weber, to give a further report on his mental 
state with special reference to: whether the nature of plaintiff's 
illness and the medical observations made on him in the last 
few years up to the present time, give grounds for the as- 
sumption that plaintiff in case the order for his tutelage were 
rescinded, would endanger his life, his health, his property 
or any other interests of life by unreasonable actions. The re- 
sult of the Judge’s personal interrogation of plaintiff is laid 
down on page 38 ff. of the protocol, while the medical expert 
Dr. Weber has rendered the requested report in a detailed writ- 
ten document of 28th November 1900 (pp. 44 to 53). With it 
the medical expert handed to the Court Dr. Schreber’s manu- 
script in 23 copy-books under the title “Memoirs of my 
Nervous Illness” dealing with his religious views and the his- 
tory of his illness. 

The Country Court in its judgment of 13th April 1901 dis- 
missed Dr. Schreber’s action. It agreed with Dr. Weber's expert 
opinion that plaintiff’s high intelligence and his capacity of 
thinking according to formal logic might not be markedly 
clouded by his mental illness; nevertheless there was danger of 
unreasonable action. As perusal of the “Memoirs” proves and 
the medical expert Dr. Weber confirms, plaintiff suffers to a 
considerable extent from hallucinations and delusions, which 


pees) 
408 
(eee 





Addendum E 


center on his relation to God and his exceptional position in 
the universe. This delusional system dominates his whole feel- 
ing and thinking, it influences his conception of the world and 
his judgment of men and things. Under such circumstances it 
is quite incalculable what plaintiff's decisions might be if free- 
dom of action were restored to him; whether they would be 
taken according to the sphere of ideas which remained com- 
paratively untouched by his madness, or under compulsion of 
his morbid psychic processes. In two matters the detrimental 
effect of Dr. Schreber’s delusional ideas on his whole outlook, 
is particularly clear: in his relation to his wife who suffers 
much from his delusion of being unmanned, and to whom, 
when she tries to object to his ideas, he always readily suggests 
that she could divorce him. Further, plaintiff has the urgent de- 
sire to make his “Memoirs” known to the public in print, and 
strives to have the order of tutelage rescinded mainly to be 
able to conclude a valid contract for publishing his manu- 
script. Actually the “Memoirs” are quite unfit for publication; 
plaintiff would thereby compromise his family and himself in 
an unheard-of fashion, might even expose himself to the dan- 
ger of criminal prosecution. That plaintiff cannot recognize 
this himself proves to what extent, in consequence of his 
pathologically altered conception of the world, the proper ap- 
preciation of the actual circumstances of life, the capacity of 
distinguishing between the permitted and the impermissible, 
have been lost. 

Plaintiff appealed against the Country Court's judgment 
and repeated his request for rescission of the Order placing him 
under the care of a guardian, while the Public Prosecutor asked 
for dismissal of the appeal. The contested judgment referred to 
in its entirety, besides all documents cited in it, Dr. Schreber’s 
personal written communication to the Court and to the 
Asylum authorities, as well as the content of the tutelage file 
of the District Court CJI 64/99, were read out in Court. The 


ADDENDA 


reading of Schreber’s “Memoirs” was restricted to Chapters 1, 
2, 18, 19, as agreed between both parties. 

Plaintiff appeared personally at the hearings before the 
Court of Appeal and frequently pleaded himself beside his le- 
gal representative. He presented from his own pen a number of 
rejoinders contradicting the conclusions of the First Instance 
and Dr. Weber's expert opinion on which it was based, and dis- 
cussed thoroughly his opposite opinion in factual and legal re- 
spects. Plaintiff stressed that the formal treatment which he 
personally gave to his case should be taken into consideration 
by the Judges in deciding the question of his legal capacity. A 
person who is capable of dealing with so involved a legal mat- 
ter in self-composed representations with circumspection and 
expert knowledge, and is tactful and discreet where other peo- 
ple’s opinions are concerned, should be trusted to be capable 
also of managing the simpler and less important matters of or- 
dinary life in a competent way. 

The following of plaintiff's pleadings are to be stressed: 


First, plaintiff denies that in the District Court he admitted be- 
ing or having been mentally ill. He only concedes that his 
nervous system has for years been in a morbid state; but his 
mind, that is to say the working together of the sum total of 
his intellectual powers, is as clear and healthy as any person’s. 
When the medical expert suggests that he is suffering from a 
form of insanity (paranoia), in that he declares a priori every- 
thing as morbid imaginings that plaintiff reported in his 
“Memoirs” about the intimate communication between him- 
self and God and about divine miracles, he goes in the face of 
truth. He naturally knows the medical expert could do no 
other than apply to his (Dr. Schreber's) case the standards of 


410 
(eae) 


_— 


Addendum E 


common scientific experience, and he does not in the least 
want to chide him because of this approach. Dr. Weber stands 
with his feet firmly planted in rationalism, which denies out 
of hand the possibility of supernatural happenings. 

In opposition to him plaintiff champions fundamentally the 
contrary point of view: the certainty of his knowledge of God 
and the absolute conviction that he is dealing with God and di- 
vine miracles tower for him above all human science. It has 
become and must remain for him the center of his whole life, 
because God still reveals Himself anew to him daily and 
hourly in His miracles and in His language. His steady serenity 
of spirit rests on this; it remains with him despite all the ad- 
versities of life and can be observed by everyone who meets 
him; from it also springs the calm, kindly feeling which he en- 
tertains even towards those who in earlier years unwittingly 
hurt him, and this explains the great stress he lays on the pub- 
lication of his “Memoirs.” He does not wish to make propa- 
ganda for his belief in miracles, much less would he want to 
sacrifice one penny for it. His only reason in wishing to pub- 
lish his “Memoirs” is to raise doubt whether it is possible that 
after all his “delusional system,” as one sees fit to call it, has a 
basis in truth and he has really been granted a glance behind 
that dark veil which otherwise hides the beyond from the eyes 
of man. He is convinced that after the publication of his book 
the scientific world will take a serious interest in his person. 
Far from wishing to play the prophet of a new religion he looks 
upon himself solely as an object of scientific observation. 
Whatever one may think of his belief in miracles, no one is en- 
titled to see in it a mental defect which makes plaintiff require 
State care. One does not usually and without further reason 
declare the adherents of spiritualism mentally ill and put them 
under a guardian, although their way of looking at things su- 
pernaturally is also neither shared nor comprehended by the 
vast majority of their fellow men. 


r 
41] 
L 


ADDENDA 


II 


Even supposing that psychiatrically speaking he had to be 
counted mentally ill, it would have to be proved that in conse- 
quence he is incapable of managing his affairs. 

The expert refused to express a definite opinion on this last 
point. He only stated that it was unpredictable whether and in 
how far plaintiff might be induced to act unreasonably, if his 
freedom of action were restored to him. With such general 
forms of speech and vague fears the matter is not settled. 
Rather it would have to be proved on the basis of facts and ac- 
tual experiences particularly those of the last few years, that 
and in what direction he has a tendency to act unreasonably 
because of his “delusions and hallucinations.” 

He admits that there is less chance of making such observa- 
tions on a person detained in an Asylum than on a person at 
large. Strictly speaking, the medical expert Dr. Weber only 
came to know plaintiff more closely since Easter 1900 when he 
was permitted to share meals regularly at the family table. 
This has changed considerably in the meantime. Since the pre- 
vious report was furnished, more than a year has passed during 
which he has been granted considerable freedom of movement 
by the authorities of the Asylum. He has undertaken numer- 
ous greater and smaller excursions, visited places of public 
amusement, shops, churches, theaters and concerts, in the last 
six months without being accompanied by an attendant, and 
was provided with a certain amount of money. He declares 
that nobody will ever have noticed the least sign of faulty con- 
duct on these occasions. It never occurred to him to molest 
other people by making known his delusions. He believes for 
instance to be justified in maintaining that the ladies of the 
family table of the Director of the Asylum would not have the 
faintest idea of his delusions, unless informed of them some 
other way. It is true that at times he mentioned them to his 


ee fal 
412 
eee 








Addendum E 


wife, but this is adequately explained by the close bond that 
exists between them. 

The only way in which his behavior to the outside world is 
influenced to a certain extent by his “delusional ideas” and 
which could perhaps make him appear unreasonable in the 
eyes of other people, is the circumstance also stressed by the 
expert Dr. Weber, that he sometimes decks himself out with 
some feminine ornaments (ribbons, trumpery necklaces and 
suchlike). This he admits might appear silly to many people, 
but states that he has good reasons for it. He thereby usually 
achieves considerable amelioration of the states of bellowing 
which would otherwise be extremely troublesome to him and 
his environment. At worst it is only a whim, absolutely harm- 
less and not in any way detrimental either to himself or others. 

The financial aspect does not enter into consideration; the 
whole lot cost him hardly more than a few marks. 


III 
The medical expert stressed in his report: 


“The most important point for judging the patient's ca- 
pacity for appropriate action is the fact that everything 
which to objective observation appears as delusions and 
hallucinations is for him unalterable truth and adequate 
motive for action.” 


He unreservedly admits the first part of this, but must 
counter the second with an unconditional “No.” The religious 
conceptions he cherishes could never lead him to unreasonable 
action in practical life. They are completely without influence 
on his capacity to manage his own affairs and care for his inter- 
ests. He cannot understand how Dr. Weber arrived at the 


Ge eel 
413 
eee] 


ADDENDA 


contrary opinion. He certainly has not given any grounds for it 
in his actions up till now. He does not dream of bringing pecu- 
niary sacrifices to further his belief or to have the presence of 
“nerves of voluptuousness” in him confirmed. The certainty 
of his knowledge of God is so great and unshakable, that he is 
indifferent to what other people think about the truth or prob- 
ability of his ideas. 

He wishes to be trusted in his assurances about his future 
behavior, because he has never given any cause to doubt the 
inviolability of his love of truth. The expert’s apprehensions 
that it was “entirely incalculable” to what extent plaintiff 
could be led to unreasonable action by his delusions are there- 
fore unfounded. The Country Court itself considers this appre- 
hension justified chiefly in two points: firstly in respect to the 
matrimonial relation to his wife which could be destroyed by 
rescinding the tutelage order, and secondly in view of his plan 
to publish his “Memoirs,” as he would thereby compromise 
himself and even run the risk of a penalty. But neither of these 
considerations suffices to uphold his tutelage. 


(a) The matrimonial bond between himself and his wife has 
in consequence of his illness for years been as good as non- 
existent and would remain in abeyance, if his tutelage were 
continued in the future, perhaps even to the end of the life 
of either spouse. It is possible that the return to his family 
for which he strives might entail inconveniences for his wife. 
But this does not come into consideration because a person 
can be placed under tutelage only in his own interests, in 
order to safeguard him from the threatening dangers of his un- 
reasonable actions, but never to protect other persons, how- 
ever closely related, from unpleasantness. Of course he has 
legal liabilities to his wife in that he has to provide adequate 
maintenance for her. He would never shrink from fulfilling 
this legal obligation; rather he would at all times be prepared 


ie al 
414 
Le ed 


Addendum E 


to provide his wife with sufficient means to live apart from 
him, in case after his return from the Asylum circumstances 
should arise in which she could not reasonably be expected to 
live with him. 

The expert’s remark that, when his wife argues about his 
belief in miracles he is quick to indicate that she could divorce 
him, apparently rests on a misunderstanding. He has never 
toyed with the idea of divorce nor shown indifference to the 
continuance of the marital bond. The whole extensive corre- 
spondence he maintained with his wife for years proves how 
heartfelt his love for her still is and how it pains him that she 
too has been made so deeply unhappy by his illness. Ac- 
cordingly he discussed the possibility of divorce only by men- 
tioning a few times that if his disturbing states of bellowing 
should make life with him intolerable, or should it be impossi- 
ble for her to continue loving and respecting him because of 
certain other peculiarities arising from his belief in miracles, 
she had the legal right to divorce him. 

(b) The second example of to what extent he acts under the 
compulsion of his pathological ideas was seen by the District 
Court in the content of the “Memoirs” and his wish to see 
them published. 

He never concealed from himself and in fact expressed in 
the Preface to the “Memoirs” that there are certain objections 
to their publication. Should they reach the printer, he would 
continue to keep in mind erasing certain passages and toning 
down certain expressions beforehand. He does not intend pub- 
lishing them in their present form. He only submitted the 
manuscript for inspection to the publishers in Leipzig with 
whom he entered into negotiations about the publication of 
the “Memoirs.” 

Even if the manuscript remained completely unaltered he 
wishes to protest strongly that he would thereby “compromise” 
any member of his family, as the District Court seems to 


ADDENDA 


assume. There can be no question of this. The “Memoirs” do 
not contain the least that might be construed as damaging to 
the reputation of his father, his brother or his wife. Plaintiff ac- 
cepts fully any risk of compromising himself in publishing his 
“Memoirs.” The worst that could befall him is that one would 
consider him mentally deranged and this one does in any case. 
Actually he believes that there is no danger that anybody who 
reads his “Memoirs” carefully would think less of him after- 
wards than before. At all times his only aim has been to dis- 
cover the truth. It is true as the contested judgment criticizes 
in his manuscript, that he occasionally uses offensive strong 
language. But these expressions do not originate from him, but 
occur only where he relates the content of the conversations 
the voices held with him. It was not his fault that these voices 
frequently used expressions not fit for drawing rooms. Besides, 
his “Memoirs” were not written for flappers or High School 
girls. Admittedly there is one person who might feel hurt by 
the publication of the “Memoirs” and who might possibly 
bring a libel action against him; it is Professor Flechsig in Leip- 
zig. Even here, however, plaintiff only related events about him 
which from information received from the voices talking to 
him he had to believe were true. He is certain that Flechsig will 
forgive him, and he had even thought of sending him a copy of 
the “Memoirs” because he believed that Flechsig would take a 
scientific interest in the problems discussed. It was far from 
him to attack Flechsig’s personal honor. But should, despite 
his expectations, the publication of the manuscript lead to his 
being punished for libel, he was prepared for the sake of the 
cause to accept this new martyrdom also, and no one in his 
opinion had the right to prevent him from doing so. 


The Public Prosecutor considers the continuance of the tute- 
lage legally necessary and dictated by plaintiff’s own interests; 
he holds there is not the slightest doubt that Dr. Schreber 


i. Wel 
416 


Addendum E 


suffers from paranoia judging from his pleadings before the 
Court of Appeal. It is equally beyond doubt that in conse- 
quence he is not in a position to manage his own affairs rea- 
sonably, although the medical expert wishing to limit his 
competence, did not express a sufficiently definite opinion on 
this point. As Dr. Weber rightly says psychic processes are an 
organic unity and it is impossible that those areas of mental 
life not immediately filled with delusional ideas would remain 
entirely untouched by them; one should not be misled by 
plaintiff's verbal and written statements giving in part the im- 
pression of clarity. 

There is no need to detail individual facts to show plain- 
tiff’s incapacity to manage his own affairs. Such facts exist. For 
instance plaintiff is obviously incapable of judging how much 
longer he will have to remain in the Asylum. If his tutelage 
were rescinded he would sooner or later certainly endeavor to 
be discharged from the Asylum. In one of his letters to the 
lawyer Dr. Thiirmer, his Counsel in the District Court (pp. 68, 
74 of the file}, he wrote: 


“He knows exactly and better than any doctor what is 
good for him physically and mentally, as it is a matter of 
defending himself against the harmful effects of divine 
miracles.” 


One may see from this that plaintiff has no real insight into 
his illness and that he will not listen to advice. In addition he 
is visited by hallucinations which according to Dr. Weber's 
evidence preoccupy him in the middle of a conversation and 
disturb his concentration. It is evident that this might be disas- 
trous when he is dealing with money matters. It is not so sim- 
ple to administer his and his wife’s estate. According to the 
last inventory made by the President of the District Court 
Schmidt in Leipzig in his capacity as guardian (p. 177 of the 


ADDENDA 


tutelage file} it consists in part of real estate and in a share of a 
copyright. Dr. Schreber’s behavior towards his wife also gives 
rise to well-founded doubts whether he would be capable of 
freeing himself from the influence of his delusional ideas in his 
dispositions for her. Despite all assurances to the contrary 
given by plaintiff in this respect, one must also fear that in pur- 
suing the idea of a divine mission he might be led to expenses 
which he would not incur as a man acting of his own free will. 
How much Dr. Schreber’s whole way of thinking is faulty is 
shown not least by his persistent and firm intention of pub- 
lishing his “Memoirs.” 

Plaintiff denies all these allegations. He states that the 
experience gained since Dr. Weber’s last report of 28th No- 
vember 1900, has proved that despite all alleged delusions and 
hallucinations he is perfectly capable of conducting reasonably 
his business and other affairs alone and in accordance with his 
legal interests. He is convinced that in the face of these new 
experiences Dr. Weber himself would no longer wish to main- 
tain his statements in an earlier report about plaintiff’s inca- 
pacity to manage his affairs. 

It is correct that he strives to achieve his release from the 
Asylum in the not too distant future. He expects no further 
improvement in his health by continuing his stay at Sonnen- 
stein. But a little delay may yet be necessary. He agrees that it 
might be sensible to remain in the Asylum as long as his states 
of bellowing persist, although he has observed that the bellow- 
ing occurred only while he was in the Asylum but almost 
never outside, when traveling, etc. But these “vociferations” 
have nothing to do with his capacity or otherwise of managing 
his affairs. They are only a welfare and police matter which in 
certain circumstances might give the Asylum authorities— 
in their capacity as organs of the security police—the right 
to keep him in the Asylum against his will. He wishes to 


Addendum E 


repeat however that no force would be necessary in this 
direction, as he would not oppose remaining in the Asylum 
while disturbances could be feared from frequent attacks of 
bellowing. 

The Court of Appeal in its resolution on the evidence 
of 30th December 1901 asked Dr. Weber to furnish a supple- 
ment to his first report clarifying three matters under a, b, c 
of the resolution, and particularly requested information 
about the experiences made since November 1900 respecting 
plaintiff's capacity to move freely outside the Asylum and 
manage his affairs. Dr. Weber rendered the report (p. 203 ff.) 
in writing under oath, and supplemented it with a postscript 
(p. 231) prompted by some of Dr. Schreber's (p. 223 ff.) argu- 
ments against the factual basis of his report. Both reports were 
read in Court. 

Plaintiff believes that the statements of the later report 
can be interpreted as more favorable to him. He is satisfied 
that the medical expert is now in doubt as to whether continu- 
ation of his tutelage is imperative. In point of fact in the last 
two years not a single instance of unreasonable action could 
be proved against him. Even the occasional disturbing bellow- 
ing sounds which still seem to cause the medical expert some 
apprehension, but which outside the Asylum never amount to 
a serious annoyance and breach of the peace, have lately de- 
creased. During his week's stay in Leipzig they never once 
occurred as his relatives would confirm. As the bellowing 
is caused automatically, that is to say independently of his 
will, it could not possibly be considered a sign of a tendency to 
unreasonable behavior. 

The medical expert is wrong in stating that he acted unrea- 
sonably in a recent illness (diarrhea and vomiting) by refusing 
the medicines ordered for him. He closely followed medical in- 
structions (proof: attendant Miller), and it cannot be said that 


ADDENDA 


he fails to appreciate the value of medicines, even despises 
them. The reverse is seen to be true from the fact that he did 
not refuse to take sleeping drugs for his insomnia. 

Besides, he has diligently sought every opportunity lately of 
conversing with other people including strangers while on his 
walks, excursions, and journeys. He wished to refer to their ev- 
idence. Of the great many people concerned he wished to 
name as witnesses for the time being only the following: his 
brother-in-law, the merchant Karl Jung in Leipzig and his wife, 
his eldest sister; his brother-in-law, the Country Court Judge 
Krause in Chemnitz and his wife, his youngest sister; his 
guardian, President of the District Court Schmidt in Leipzig 
and his wife; the physician Dr. Nakonz; the lawyer Dr. Schill; 
Dr. Hennig; the publisher Nauhardt, the possible publisher of 
his “Memoirs,” all in Leipzig; finally the retired President of 
the Court Thierbach in Dresden and Majors Meissner and 
Sander in Pirna. They would all confirm that during their 
meetings with him they received the impression of a com- 
pletely reasonable person capable of every demand of social 
and business life, in whom they as laymen did not notice the 
least sign of a mental illness, let alone one making him inca- 
pable of managing his affairs. 

More recently a very important fact was added for judging 
his legal capacity. In order to make the Asylum authorities 
take a more definite stand regarding the question of his tute- 
lage, he tried to sound them whether there was any objection 
to his possible discharge from the Asylum in the near future. 
He did not mean immediate discharge from one day to the 
next. The precarious health of his wife, with whom he wishes 
to live together again and the choice of a home suitable for her 
as well as himself, would require careful consideration and 
preparations which would take time. He also assumes that the 
Asylum authorities would wish to consult his guardian and 
perhaps even his wife before his discharge and above all would 


Addendum E 


wish to ensure that living arrangements had been made. He 
therefore formulated his question in a letter to Dr. Weber of 
29th May 1902 in the following way: 


“Whether, the present state of affairs prevailing and pro- 
vided no objection were raised by the guardian or judi- 
cial authority against discharge, and provided his wife 
were not averse to having him or some other residence 
were found, the Asylum authorities would consider 
granting his wish to be discharged in due course taking 
into consideration only welfare police matters.” 


Dr. Weber answered on 30th May 1902 (p. 252b/253 in the 
file) as follows: 


"The Asylum authorities would at present not place an 
obstacle in the way of your discharge with the provisos 
mentioned in your letter and as long as there is no dete- 
rioration in your condition. 

For the Asylum authorities, apart from possible 
medical advice, the decisive moment when consid- 
ering discharge or a trial leave period, is only the pos- 
sible ‘danger’ which the patient’s illness may bring to 
himself or others. Such does not exist in the present 
Case. ete: 

The Public Prosecutor acknowledges the letters exchanged 
between plaintiff and Dr. Weber. Nevertheless, he opposes re- 
scinding the tutelage, because despite all plaintiff's protesta- 
tions to the contrary, the fear cannot be denied that he may be 
driven to foolish and unreasonable actions under the compul- 
sion of his delusional insanity. For instance plaintiff would 
certainly have to bring considerable financial sacrifice in order 
to carry through his planned publication of the “Memoirs,” as 


ADDENDA 


an ordinary contract with a publisher is most unlikely to be 
concluded. 
Plaintiff counters the last point as follows: 


“The publication of the Memoirs’ is planned, according 
to preliminary agreement with the publisher Nauhardt 
in Leipzig, in the form of a contract on the basis of a 
commission, the same form of publication in which his 
father’s ‘Medical Indoor Gymnastics’ appeared. The fi- 
nancial risk he runs is restricted to the production costs 
of the book, a sum of...... marks. Such an expenditure 
is small in relation to his total means which may be esti- 
mated at...... marks. For the rest he wishes to repeat 
his previous assurance that he would not make propa- 
ganda for his belief in miracles and that it would not oc- 
cur to him to sacrifice one penny of his capital for it.” 


GROUNDS OF THE JUDGMENT 


The Court is in no doubt that the appellant is insane. One 
would not wish to argue with him whether in fact he suffers 
from a mental illness known as paranoia. He lacks insight into 
the pathological nature of the inspirations and ideas which 
move him. What to objective observation is hallucination and 
delusion is for him irrefutable certainty. Even now he holds 
fast to the conviction that God manifests Himself to him di- 
rectly and continuously performs His miracles on him. This 
conviction, as he says himself, towers high above all human 
insight and science. 

But it is not sufficient grounds for placing plaintiff under 
tutelage that his mental processes are pathologically disturbed. 
The Civil Code demands under § 6, No. | apart from the exis- 
tence of a mental illness that the patient in consequence 


Addendum E 


thereof is incapable of managing his affairs. Not every mental 
abnormality therefore leads necessarily to a negation of legal 
capacity. Placing under tutelage is justified only when mental 
illness is so severe that it prevents the patient from managing 
all affairs like a child under the age of seven. If the patient is 
not completely deprived of the capacity of acting sensibly and 
reasonably, but is only restricted through mental illness in ap- 
preciating special matters or a certain range of his affairs, this 
can in certain circumstances cause him to be made a ward of 
the Court (§ 1910, section 2 of the Civil Code}, but never to be 
placed under tutelage. 

“Affairs” referred to by the law in § 6, No. 1, is not to be 
understood only as pecuniary affairs as the District Court 
rightly assumed. 

The concept embraces the entirety of all circumstances of 
life, the ordered regulation of which is of interest to the law: 
protection of the person to be placed under tutelage, of his life 
and health, no less than the care of his relatives and his estate. 
Tutelage is primarily a protective measure. It is designed to as- 
sist him, who in consequence of being without insight is inca- 
pable of protecting himself, from being taken advantage of, and 
against exploitation by others. The State’s duty to the patient 
extends as far as the patient’s need of protection. But the pre- 
cautionary measure of tutelage offered by law to the patient to 
save him in civil life from dangers arising out of his lack of 
will power, must in fact be adequate and effective. Placing un- 
der tutelage is only permissible if such dangers to the person 
concerned are present which can be successfully countered by 
abjudication of his legal capacity (§ 104° of the Civil Code} and 
by appointing a guardian for the general care of his personal 
and pecuniary affairs (§ 1896). (Compare memorandum to the 
draft of the Civil Code, p. 2.) 

In this sense is appellant in need of such protection or is he 
capable of managing his affairs himself? 


ADDENDA 


The medical expert Dr. Weber gives no definite answer to 
this question in his two reports. He does not answer it with a 
direct yes or no. The decision is clearly difficult for him. 
Whereas in the usual clear-cut cases of mental illness he gener- 
ally does not hesitate to draw the legal consequences from a 
proved mental illness (p. 203b) himself for the sake of brevity, 
he declines to do so in the present case. He limits himself to 
delineating the picture of plaintiff’s mental illness and to as- 
sembling the actual instances in which the patient’s disturbed 
mental life presents itself conspicuously, leaving it to the 
Judge to decide for himself from his reports whether plaintiff is 
to be considered capable of safeguarding his life interests in 
civil affairs. 

One cannot raise any objection to the medical expert’s atti- 
tude. It is in fact not within the province of the medical expert 
to decide the practical legal aspect of the ascertained mental 
illness of a person, nor its influence on his legal capacity. To 
form an opinion on this question is solely the responsibility of 
the Judge. 

Because the medical expert calls the illness which is mani- 
fested by plaintiff’s delusions paranoia, one might be tempted 
to regard the question sub judice as thereby already decided. 
Thus Endemann in his textbook (§ 31, p. 136, No. 8, p. 137, 3rd 
Edition) states simply that every person suffering from para- 
noia can be placed under tutelage; he is satisfied that the na- 
ture of this mental illness is in itself sufficient proof that the 
person suffering from it is incapable of weighing reasonably 
the consequences of his actions. 

This goes too far. As the medical expert Dr. Weber, an ac- 
knowledged authority in the science of psychiatry, correctly 
emphasizes, there are numerous paranoiacs who, despite se- 
vere mental derangement and although their thinking some- 
times moves in the confines of the most absurd delusional 
ideas, are hardly recognized as sick by their environment, carry 


7 
424 
| 


Addendum E 


on their daily business correctly and in general fulfill the du- 
ties of their profession adequately. One might consider them 
peculiar, call them whimsical and think that they have fixed 
ideas, but as a rule one does not think of placing them under 
tutelage. The progress of recent legislation lies precisely in 
the fact that it is now possible to leave such more or less 
harmless persons in possession of their legal capacity of free 
disposition necessary to their progress in life, despite their as- 
certained mental derangement. Even though such persons are 
influenced by compulsive ideas which make them appear irre- 
sponsible in those fields of mental life directly affected they 
have not altogether lost the faculty of acting reasonably. In 
those fields of mental activity removed from their delusional 
ideas or less exposed to them, they are mostly capable of carry- 
ing out their professional duties in a manner which gives rise 
to no objection. 

Compare Krafft-Ebing, Doubtful Mental States, p. 8; also 
Samter, in Gruchots Beitrdgen, June 1901, p. 3. 

According to Dr. Weber’s report (p. 206) to this group of ill- 
nesses belongs plaintiff's psychosis in the form it has taken in 
the last four years after the transition from the stage of acute 
insanity to the chronic illness. It is true plaintiff’s way of look- 
ing at the world is falsified by the idea ruling him about his ex- 
traordinary position towards God, and Dr. Schreber suffers 
much from hallucinations. He acknowledges that the center of 
his life is his conviction that he is the continual object of the 
divine power of miracles. But only one single field of plaintiff's 
mental life is affected, the field of religion. What in our views 
is connected with divine matters and our belief about the rela- 
tion of man to God, plaintiff will never be able to judge cor- 
rectly, because he lacks insight into the pathological nature of 
his mode of thinking. But it does not necessarily follow that 
his judgment in all other fields of mental life must be equally 
pathologically altered. A person’s religious feelings may have 


ADDENDA 


many and important points of contact with other fields of his 
mental life; nevertheless one cannot maintain that all these 
need be equally affected. The religious conviction which fills 
the believer and often enough is the center of life of the men- 
tally healthy, does not enter into all aspects of life; Dr. Weber 
points out convincingly how a person can be in close scientific 
contact with another for a long time without gaining any idea 
of his religious convictions, these usually have no very close 
connection with his scientific views, both complexes of ideas 
leading up to a point a separate existence in his brain. 

The case of the paranoiac’s delusional system is similar ac- 
cording to the medical expert’s statement (p. 205b). The Pro- 
secuting Authority is therefore not correct when it holds 
against plaintiff, following Endemann’s expositions, that be- 
cause he is under the influence of delusional ideas his whole 
thinking therefore rests eo ipso on a false basis, and that in 
consequence all his acts of will must be pathologically influ- 
enced; as mental life is a unity, pathological fields of thought 
must of necessity spread to parts apparently healthy and little 
touched by the delusional system. 

It would appear that this notion of the unity of all psychic 
events is reflected in the scientific views of modern psychia- 
try. The medical expert Dr. Weber in his report also makes it 
his starting point (pp. 447, 205). Nevertheless its immediate 
importance is only theoretical. Opposite views used to be held; 
one unhesitatingly recognized “partial insanity” and that this 
concept is still somewhat justified even today, is seen in Dr. 
Weber's report (p. 205b). Whatever one’s scientific or theoreti- 
cal views about this question, the Judge ordering tutelage has 
to consider the fact proved by experience, that the influence of 
delusional ideas ruling a paranoiac does not affect equally all 
fields of his ordinary civil life. Frequently there is present only 
a “partial insanity,” the pathological ideas withdraw to a cer- 
tain circumscribed field and within these limits maintain a 


r 
426 
L 


Addendum E 


kind of “separate existence,” while other fields of life remain 
comparatively untouched and do not show any signs of mental 
derangement in the patient (p. 205). 

Certainly, one cannot deny the possibility of a partial dis- 
turbance spreading to a person’s total mental function. This is 
a theoretical possibility in every form of mental abnormality. 
Dr. Weber perhaps wished to express this and nothing but this, 
when he declared in his first report (p. 53) that it was unpre- 
dictable how at any given moment plaintiff might decide, 
should his legal capacity be restored; whether according to the 
dictates of his relatively healthy ideas or under the compulsion 
of the pathological belief in miracles which fills him. 

This alone however does not suffice for placing him under 
tutelage. As plaintiff rightly argues, one cannot deprive him of 
his legal capacity on the mere suspicion that his delusional 
ideas might lead him to unreasonable action in this or that 
field. According to law it is necessary to establish positively 
that in consequence of mental illness he is incapable of manag- 
ing his affairs (§ 6' of the Civil Code). The burden of proof lies 
with him who requests an order placing a person under tute- 
lage. If proof cannot be furnished against plaintiff and if official 
inquiries according to § 653 C.P.O., into the mental state of 
the patient have also not led to any definite result, then the or- 
der of tutelage cannot be maintained. 

It is a debatable point what demands such proof should ful- 
fill. One certainly cannot go as far as plaintiff who wishes to 
allow a patient to be placed under tutelage only when the dan- 
ger of his acting unreasonably is based on certainty. On the 
other hand one must not be satisfied with mere doubts. The 
doubts must at least be tangible and have, through facts or oth- 
erwise, become probabilities. 

The showing of proof is therefore shifted to that field which 
alone can offer a conclusive answer to the question to be de- 
cided, namely the field of factual experiences. 


ADDENDA 


In order to place a person under tutelage it must be ascer- 
tained to what extent a patient's delusions influence his ac- 
tions and omissions in social life. Is the person to be placed 
under tutelage still capable of meeting the demands of practi- 
cal life despite his clouded mind, or are his senses so disturbed 
that his judgment for the reality of things and their sensible 
comprehension has been lost? This can only be decided with 
certainty on the basis of experience. The patient must actually 
have been exposed to the demands of life and have had to deal 
with affairs of legal consequence. Observations made on him 
in such circumstances would be the best test for establishing 
the correctness of his statement that though ill, he is neverthe- 
less able of managing his affairs sensibly and in accordance 
with his interests like any other reasonable human being. The 
nature of his mental illness does not afford a reliable clue for 
the medical specialist. It only admits of suppositions. As al- 
ready stated the presence of paranoia does not exclude the con- 
tinuance of complete legal capacity. 

In this opinion the Court is in agreement with the medical 
expert. Even in his first report of 28th November 1900 Dr. 
Weber expressed regret that plaintiff had till then been rather 
restricted in acting independently in the ordering of his affairs 
outside the walls of the Asylum, so that the matter had not 
been put to proper test (p. 45). He therefore limited himself 
mainly to giving a picture of the illness as it presented at the 
time to the eye of the expert observer. 

This situation has improved in the meantime. Since the 
first report the patient has been permitted greater freedom 
of movement. He has been allowed contact with the most 
varied circles of the outside world. He has had the opportunity 
of showing, in dealing with his relatives and others, to what 
extent his delusional ideas rule his general thinking and 
feeling and to what extent they influence his relation to his 
fellow men. The Court of Appeal now has much more factual 


(ent 
428 
Ee 


Addendum E 


material for its judgment than the lower Court had at the time. 
The observations which have been made in this matter are al- 
together favorable to plaintiff. 

One observation was forced on the Judges of the Court of 
Appeal in their dealings with plaintiff during the proceedings; 
it was that Dr. Schreber’s intellectual powers and the clarity of 
his thinking had in no way suffered by his illness. The way he 
personally took up the fight against the tutelage under which 
he was placed and how he carried it through according to plan, 
the acuity of the logical and juristical operations developed by 
him, the reasonableness with which he conducted himself, and 
last but not least the refined measured attitude he showed 
when in opposition to the medical expert and the Prosecutor— 
all this affords indisputable proof that in this field plaintiff has 
no need of protection by a guardian, rather in conducting his 
case he was able to preserve his interests to the full and inde- 
pendently, better indeed than anybody else could have done it 
in his place. 

Too great a weight must, however, not be placed on this 
side of plaintiff's mental life. The capacity to think logically 
and correctly appears, as Dr. Weber remarks (p. 50b), well de- 
veloped in paranoiacs; it is not an infallible sign of the pa- 
tient’s equal capacity to judge correctly matters of life that lie 
outside pure thinking. In this sphere the complementary expe- 
riences are important which the medical expert Dr. Weber has 
had the opportunity of collecting about the patient’s behavior 
in his relation to the outside world during the last eighteen 
months, and on which he reported in his second report of 5th 
April 1902. 

In his first report Dr. Weber, despite little opportunity of 
collecting observations on Dr. Schreber’s social behavior, had 
to acknowledge that the pathological sphere of his mind was 
already fairly sharply demarcated from the rest, and had to add 
that plaintiff's judgment in matters and affairs far removed 


pam eeal 
429 


ADDENDA 


from his firmly established delusional system was usually cor- 
rect (pp. 47, 50b); in his second report he repeated this with 
great emphasis. 

The picture of the illness itself has not changed. In the 
main it is the same as when he was placed under tutelage. 
Only more material based on observation is available, giving 
the medical expert the opportunity of supplementing his previ- 
ous opinion which was based on fairly limited factual mate- 
rial, and where necessary of correcting it. There can therefore 
be no hesitation in applying the results reached by the medical 
expert only in his later report, and using them in retrospect di- 
rectly for judging plaintiff's mental state at the time when he 
was placed under tutelage. 

Dr. Weber is now convinced that plaintiff’s delusional ideas 
lead a relatively separate existence in his mental life and that 
outside the religious field which they mainly dominate they 
affect other fields particularly of daily life hardly at all; and 
that hallucinations from which plaintiff continues to suffer, do 
not now influence his feeling and thinking to any significant 
degree. Such pathological manifestations as do appear are no- 
ticeable outwardly mostly in comparatively unimportant 
fields only. Especially the more important life interests have 
withdrawn from their domination and are appreciated in a 
manner beyond reproach (pp. 208a/b, 211b, 212b). 

In order to furnish further grounds for his opinion the 
medical expert mentions a number of actual events in part 
observed by himself, in part reported to him by reliable ob- 
servers; all these have also strengthened the Appeal Court 
in its conviction that the danger of plaintiff’s wrong and inap- 
propriate action in affairs of legal consequence appears almost 
nil, in any case not so imminent as to justify the upholding of 
his tutelage. 

For a few years appellant has eaten daily as a guest at the 
family table of the Director of the Asylum without causing any 


Addendum E 


annoyance to the others present. On the contrary Dr. Weber, 
who looks upon his relation to plaintiff as a friendly one, ex- 
tols the patient’s delicate tact and forbearance which prevented 
him from molesting the company at table with his miraculous 
ideas (p. 50b). Dr. Schreber believes he can be certain that other 
persons at table, particularly the ladies, have never noticed 
even a trace of his mental illness. In view of Dr. Weber's state- 
ments about patient's conduct one can give the latter credence. 

The appellant's movements outside the Asylum also have 
not given rise to any trouble worth mentioning. While Dr. 
Schreber until the summer of 1900" was only allowed outside 
the Asylum accompanied by an attendant, he has since then 
been allowed unlimited freedom of movement unaccompanied 
outside the Asylum. He has used it to make almost daily ex- 
cursions on foot, by ship or railway, to visit all noteworthy 
parts of the environment of Pirna, partly alone, partly in com- 
pany and also at times to frequent concerts, theaters, public 
performances, etc. He has repeatedly been to Dresden to keep 
appointments at Court, to visit his wife or do some shopping, 
and lately at the invitation of his relatives and with the agree- 
ment of the Asylum authorities he even undertook a journey 
to Leipzig on his own, from which he returned after a week’s 
absence and which according to his sister’s report went off 
quite well. 

Dr. Weber confirms that plaintiff never carried out any 
unreasonable or incorrect action, always discussed openly and 
without keeping anything back those of his plans and inten- 
tions which fell outside his normal daily activities, and before 
carrying them through made sure he had the sanction of the 
Asylum authorities; when carrying them out he always 
acted cautiously and sensibly, taking into consideration all 





* Wrong: until the summer of 1900 I was not allowed out at all, and without being 


accompanied by an attendant only since the autumn of 1901. 


ADDENDA 


the circumstances. Dr. Weber thinks he is equally justified in 
believing that no great annoyances were ever caused by plain- 
tiff in his contact with the outside world (p. 290a/b). 

With the 50 marks a month pocket money which plaintiff 
has received for about a year to meet the expenses of his excur- 
sions and smaller necessaries, he has dealt in an orderly fash- 
ion and in the manner of a careful head of a family. It never 
came to notice that he squandered the money and therefore 
ran short. Neither did one have the impression of particular 
parsimony. Rather one noticed that he considered every expen- 
diture well beforehand, avoided expensive things, and did not 
buy anything useless (apart from the small feminine trinkets). 

In short, in the whole of plaintiff's behavior during his 
contact with the world outside the Asylum, there has until 
now not been a single fact which could give well-founded 
grounds for anxiety, that the patient would allow himself to be 
led astray under the compulsion of his delusional system, or 
impair his legal interests through wrong actions if freedom of 
action were restored to him. Practical experience has shown 
that plaintiff’s insane belief in miracles although forming the 
basis of his mental life does not dominate him so exclusively 
that he is deprived of the capacity of quiet and sensible consid- 
eration of other affairs of life. It is a fact then, that no impor- 
tant legal interest would be jeopardized were plaintiff to have 
full legal capacity restored to him. 

It is impossible that plaintiff would endanger his life, just as 
little as he is a danger to the lives of others. His tutelage can- 
not therefore be upheld as a necessary precaution to protect 
the patient's environment. It is admitted that disturbances 
are caused by the “bellowing attacks” which at times plague 
plaintiff and which could be very molesting to his environ- 
ment, although he states that outside the Asylum he is almost 
completely free of them. In any case the so-called automatic 
and compulsive vociferations occurring against the patient's 


Addendum E 


will have no bearing on the question of his tutelage. They 
might necessitate police intervention should the peace of the 
neighborhood be disturbed, but they cannot justify maintain- 
ing his tutelage especially as tutelage is not an effectual meas- 
ure against them. 

Also irrelevant is the Prosecutor's statement that during 
the bellowing attacks and at those moments when the pa- 
tient’s thoughts are deflected by hallucinations, his freedom of 
will appears completely suspended. This may be so. But no im- 
mediate danger would thereby arise for plaintiff; it is obviously 
a matter of rapidly passing disturbances of consciousness last- 
ing a few moments during which transactions of legal conse- 
quence are in any case precluded. 

There is also no danger to plaintiff's health according to 
Dr. Weber's report. In general he knows well how to look 
after himself and is careful not to damage himself by willful 
actions (p. 211). In this respect also there is no need for protec- 
tion by a guardian. 

It is true the medical expert mentions in his second report 
of 5th April 1902 one episode, when under the influence of his 
mental disturbance, plaintiff is said to have acted inappropri- 
ately in respect of the treatment of a short illness (diarrhea and 
vomiting}. He places little importance on this episode, and 
agrees retrospectively with plaintiff's remonstrance that the 
latter finally did acquiesce in the measures ordered by the doc- 
tors (p. 23la/b). It is certainly not correct to say that plaintiff 
because of his belief in miracles despises medicines in general. 
Plaintiff appropriately points to his having in earlier years al- 
most daily and of his own free will taken artificial sleeping 

drugs (pp. 226, 231b). Even if it were the case, placing him un- 
der tutelage would not remedy it. The patient's dislike of doc- 
tor and pharmacy, which actually does not exist, would 
neither be conquered by recognizing his legal capacity nor by 
placing him under tutelage. 


(agar) 
433 
Gs 


ADDENDA 


It would give rise to more serious concern, if plaintiff's 
illness required for its improvement a prolonged stay in the 
Asylum, and his mental derangement prevented him from 
realizing this, and if he were fighting for his tutelage to be re- 
scinded only to enforce his discharge from the Asylum after 
being freed from the surveillance of a guardian. According to 
official information which the Asylum authorities of Son- 
nenstein only recently gave plaintiff in answer to his question 
of 29th May of this year (pp. 252/253), there is now no need for 
apprehension. Dr. Weber agrees in principle with plaintiff's 
discharge from the Asylum, with certain self-explanatory pre- 
cautions. He expressly declares that he does not consider the 
patient “dangerous” to himself or others and furthermore has 
no hesitation in returning plaintiff to free congress with hu- 
man society. This negatives the need for the care of a guardian 
with respect to the patient's health. Should the Judge neverthe- 
less wish to affirm the necessity of tutelage from this point of 
view he would thereby place himself in opposition to the au- 
thoritative judgment of the medical expert and of the Asylum 
authorities. 

There is also no need to fear that the patient might endanger 
his monetary affairs through wrong and unreasonable actions. 

As the medical expert states, Dr. Schreber is fully informed 
about the state of his finances. The trial in latter years of let- 
ting him act financially on his own by giving him pocket 
money has worked out very well; plaintiff has shown himself 
in every way careful and economical. There is no reason to 
think he would squander his fortune, if unrestricted power 
over it were restored to him. Dr. Weber who knows plaintiff 
best and is most able to judge the influence of his delusional 
ideas, in any case gives the assurance that he has no reason to 
think that through pathological motives he would exceed the 
limits of his resources and squander his fortune (p. 211). 

The apprehension expressed by the lower Court that 


Addendum E 


plaintiff might be induced to offer awards for scientific investi- 
gation under the compulsion of his wondrous ideas and in or- 
der to make propaganda for them, was from the outset not very 
serious. One has never noticed a tendency in plaintiff to spend 
money for the sake of his belief in miracles. The Court of 
Appeal has therefore no reason to mistrust plaintiff, particu- 
larly as the medical expert concurs in this opinion, when the 
former affirms he does not intend making sacrifices for the ad- 
vancement of his belief in miracles and that it never entered 
his head to spend one penny for this purpose. 

Of course one cannot exclude the possibility that plaintiff 
despite his assurances might at a given moment unconsciously 
be influenced in his financial dispositions by the fantastic 
ideas which dominate him. The possibility of such an influ- 
ence exists in every mental abnormality even if it has not as- 
sumed the form of established insanity. It is, however, a 
matter of consideration for law and legal order only when such 
a possibility has become a real danger. There is nothing like 
that in this case. Only in one single instance has a direct influ- 
ence of plaintiff's religious delusions on the disposition of his 
fortune been proved. To this Dr. Schreber himself drew atten- 
tion. It concerns his attraction to all kinds of small ornaments 
with which like a woman he occasionally decorates his breast 
which he believes is changing into a woman's bosom. To spend 
money on such nonsensical stuff would never occur to him if 
he were mentally completely normal. But it is a matter of such 
insignificant sums that they could not play any part in the dif- 
ficult decision as to whether or not he is legally capable of 
managing his affairs. Even if one totally disregarded the pa- 
tient’s statements that these decorations are a kind of mental 
medication which help to calm his attacks of nervous excita- 
tion, one could at worst only consider them a whim. Besides, 
much larger sums of money are spent on such whims by other- 
wise healthy people. 


ADDENDA 


It is beyond dispute that plaintiff is completely capable of 
using his reasoning faculties to administer his and his wife’s 
finances. These are not so intricate as the Prosecutor main- 
tains, even regarding the individual items which according 
to the inventory on p. 175 ff. of the judicial guardian’s files 
make up the fortune of the married couple Schreber. Plaintiff 
has only recently brought clear proof of his competence in this 
direction, in that he dealt with the extraordinarily difficult 
question of making further use of his father’s book “Medical 
Indoor Gymnastics” after its publisher had gone into liquida- 
tion; he showed such acuity, clarity and circumspection in a 
report which he wrote at the request of his family, that they 
had no scruples whatever in following his suggestions. This is 
according to trustworthy information from his brother-in-law 
Jung, the merchant in Leipzig (pp. 41/43 of the file of the tute- 
lage proceedings). This circumstance not only proves Dr. 
Schreber's technical ability of managing such matters, but 
proves at the same time that he does not lack inclination or in- 
terest to devote to the affairs of his fortune the necessary busi- 
nesslike attention. 

It is said Dr. Schreber’s relationship to his family is threat- 
ened, the marital bond with his wife in danger of being de- 
stroyed. This also cannot be conceded. 

As plaintiff rightly stresses, marital union with his wife has 
been almost completely in abeyance for years owing to his 
mental illness and the necessity created by it of living apart 
from her. How then could this relationship be worsened if free- 
dom to decide over his person were now returned to plaintiff? 
Dr. Schreber has the sincere wish to resume domestic union 
with his wife and to live in the seclusion of a quiet country 
seat for the rest of his days, as soon as his discharge from the 
Asylum is granted. He therefore strives on his part to improve 
existing marital relations. Whether this can be achieved in 
reality is of course a different matter. The miraculous ideas 


Addendum E 


which dominate plaintiff's mental life and which probably will 
become a much greater nuisance to his wife in intimate con- 
tact with him than to outsiders further removed, make it ap- 
pear doubtful whether the married couple's living together will 
work in the long run. One would have to try and see. 

But however this may work out has no influence on the 
decision whether his tutelage is to be upheld. Even on this 
point one must agree with plaintiff that consideration of other 
persons’ well-being, even of nearest relatives cannot be taken 
into account. Placing under tutelage is primarily for the well- 
being of the person concerned. It is inadmissible in the interest 
of others. 

Compare § 2 of the Ministry of Justice’s regulations for 
placing a person under tutelage because of mental illness, etc., 
23rd December 1899. 

Moreover Dr. Schreber is well aware, as can be seen from 
his statements in the proceedings, of the moral duties which 
he owes to his wife in these difficult circumstances. His mind 
is not disturbed to such an extent as to make him blind to the 
degree of self-denial which may be demanded of his wife when 
living together with him. He will make no unfair demands on 
her if life together is impossible; also he would grant her every- 
thing to which she is legally entitled. He rejects altogether the 
suggestion that he might neglect his legal duties as regards her 
maintenance or that he would dispose of his fortune to her dis- 
advantage out of resentment towards her. He states that in any 
case a joint will of the year 1886 exists which precludes such 
dispositions. Further, however careful one must be in trusting 
the assurances of mentally ill persons, plaintiff's great moral 
seriousness and candor of character, not lessened by illness, 
also stressed by Dr. Weber and evidenced in all his declarations 
in Court, disperse all doubt in their trustworthiness. 

Thus the medical expert's earlier remark that Dr. Schreber in 
his relation to his wife is quick to speak of divorce, if she does 


ADDENDA 


not willingly agree with his delusions, loses in importance. Ap- 
parently this report is based on Dr. Schreber’s wife’s statements 
and rests on misunderstandings. Plaintiff has clarified this mat- 
ter in statements which make his behavior towards his wife 
free from any objection; these explanations are not contra- 
dicted in Dr. Weber's second report after he had seen them. 

It only remains that plaintiff might compromise himself 
and his family by his intended publication of the “Memoirs” 
and even place himself in conflict with the criminal law. 

No reasonable person would wish to deny serious scruples 
about publishing the manuscript. Not even Dr. Schreber could 
ignore them. If nevertheless he urgently insists on publication 
this is not proof of his deficient capacity of anticipating the 
results of his actions, but only proof of the strength of his be- 
lief in the truth of the revelations which have been granted 
him by God: 


"IT cannot wish”—he remarks in his own words—"that 
the knowledge of God which has been revealed to me 
should sink into oblivion with my death and an opportu- 
nity be lost to mankind of achieving more correct ideas 
about the beyond which might never occur again.” 


The appellant knows that this might have unpleasant con- 
sequences for him. But he is justified in denying the accusation 
of the lower Court that he had written anything in the 
“Memoirs” damaging to the honor of his family. It is a fact 
that nothing of the kind can be found in the manuscript. One 
also cannot maintain that the contents of the “Memoirs” are 
such as to compromise plaintiff himself. The manuscript is the 
product of a morbid imagination and nobody reading it would 
for a moment lose the feeling that its author is mentally 
deranged. But this could not possibly lower the patient in the 
respect of his fellow men, particularly as no one can miss the 


Addendum E 


seriousness of purpose and striving after truth which fill every 
chapter. As Dr. Schreber remarks correctly, the worst that 
could happen to him would be that one consider him mad, and 
this one does in any case. One cannot be offended by the 
strong language in the book. It is not plaintiff's; he only repeats 
what the voices of spirits spoke into him in earlier years when 
he was most severely hallucinated. 

This must be kept in mind when one tries to find the cor- 
rect standard for judging the defamation which Professor 
Flechsig suffers in the “Memoirs,” as he is accused of soul 
murder and worse. Even here plaintiff is not in any way talking 
for himself or acting on his own behalf, but only reporting 
what the voices of miraculous spirits told him, with whom in 
his opinion he was in communication. He certainly had no in- 
tention of attacking Professor Flechsig nor of wittingly insult- 
ing his honor while writing the “Memoirs.” The danger of 
being sued by Flechsig for libel is not very great, particularly as 
certain alterations are to be made in the manuscript before it is 
printed. Punishment appears in any case out of the question 
because plaintiff is protected in all eventualities by § 51 of the 
Criminal Code. Even should plaintiff expose himself to the 
risk of criminal conviction by it, this would not suffice as a 
reason for denying his legal capacity. Placing under tutelage 
cannot be used as a means of preventing a person with a men- 
tal defect but otherwise capable of managing his affairs, from 
undertaking one single wrong action or to save him from the 
possible adverse effects of such an action. The same applies 
to the Prosecutor’s view of the disadvantages of the contract 
which plaintiff would be forced to conclude with the publish- 
ers of the “Memoirs.” Firstly, it is by no means certain that 
the conclusion of the contract with the publisher on a com- 
mission basis must involve financial loss for plaintiff, though 
it is probable enough. But one must remember that the busi- 
ness risk which plaintiff runs is really not very considerable in 


ADDENDA 


comparison with the rest of his fortune. To save him from 
such a risk is not the task of tutelage. Plaintiff knows full well 
that the publication of the “Memoirs” could become a finan- 
cial burden; in this matter also he does not require legal pro- 
tection such as tutelage would afford him. 

The Court of Appeal has therefore arrived at the conviction 
that plaintiff is capable of dealing with the demands of life in 
all its spheres here discussed—these are the most important 
ones, the orderly regulation of which is the object of the Law. 
There is no evidence and it cannot be regarded as ascertained 
that he is incapable of managing his affairs owing to his delu- 
sional ideas. Therefore in considering the Appeal which has 
been lodged this must lead to the tutelage inflicted on plaintiff 
being rescinded without entering into new evidence by wit- 
nesses offered by him (§ 672 C.P.O.). 

The decision on costs rests on § 673 C.P.O. 


Signed: Hardraht, Vogel, Dr. Steinmetz, Nicolai, Dr. Paul. 
Dresden, 26th July 1902. 

(L.S.) Heinker, Clerk to the Royal Superior Country Court 

of Saxony. 

No notice of appeal has been received at the Imperial 
German High Court in the above action within the required 
period ended on Ist September 1902. 

Leipzig, 3rd September 1902. 

(L.S.) Schubotz, Secretariat VI of the Imperial German High 

Court. 

VLZ.1520/02. 

The above judgment became valid on Ist September 1902 as 
hereby witnessed. 

Dresden, 17th September 1902. 

(L.S.) Miiller, Clerk to the Royal Superior Country Court 

of Saxony. 


itt 
440 





NOTES 


IN THESE NOTES we have limited ourselves to giving 
reasons for our translation of various difficult and important 
terms in Schreber’s text. We have only commented on the text 
so far as it was necessary to explain the translation. We have 
not attempted a detailed commentary on the clinical insight 
which Schreber’s Memoirs furnish on so many aspects of men- 
tal illness. Such an endeavor would mean almost writing a 
textbook of psychiatry. 


Fleeting-improvised-men (p. 17, footnote 1): fltichtig hinge- 
machte Mdnner. These were not beings produced by sexual 
reproduction, but souls put down temporarily in human form 
directly by divine miracle. The word hingemachte indicates 
they are not complete beings, but improvised, and has an 
anal implication as hinmachen can also mean to defecate; 
fliichtig (suggesting an element of punning with Flechsig) 


gees 
441 
a 


Notes 


refers both to their being fleetingly-improvised and that their 
existence was transitory or fleeting; Manner because they 
appeared in human shape. Their special purpose is explained 
later (p. 61): they maintain and provide with the necessities 
of life the sole survivor selected to renew mankind after 
world catastrophes, until his offspring are sufficiently numer- 
ous to maintain themselves. Then they vanish. Their appear- 
ance therefore proved to Schreber that mankind had perished. 
In the English translation of Freud's (1911) paper the fleeting- 
improvised-men are translated as “miracled men, cursory 
contraptions.” 


The sun (p. 21) plays an important part in Schreber’s story. 
Because its gender is female in German we refer to the sun as 
she throughout the Memoirs. 


Quotation (p. 21, footnote 3) from Schiller’s “Ode to Joy,” from 
which Schreber quotes again later (p. 249). 


To form a nerve-contact (pp. 23-24): Nervenanhang nehmen. 
This neologism, meaning to attach to, or be in contact with 
nerves, is used by Schreber as a concrete expression for a super- 
natural, mystical union with God, Who is taken to be the sum 
total of all nerves, or with nerves in the sense of souls, the rem- 
nants of departed human beings. Schreber could not explain 
how Flechsig’s and other souls of still living persons could be 
in nerve-contact with him without having departed. In foot- 
note 5 (p. 24) which he added in 1902 when he had improved 
greatly, he reverts to the original abstract, ie. psychological 
meaning of attraction: “Attractive is that which interests.” 
During his illness he considered it concretely as a mechanical 
attachment. 


Blessedness (p. 24}: Seligkeit. Grimm’s WGrterbuch gives sev- 


Notes 


eral meanings: (1) eternal joy and security in communion with 
God, used in relation to life after death; (2) in more modem 
use, other than in a religious sense, to emphasize excessive 
and greatest happiness. Schreber combines both senses in his 
use of the word. A further complication is that Blessedness 
is “closely related to voluptuousness” (p. 249}, even iden- 
tical with it (p. 308), which is “uninterrupted enjoyment cou- 
pled with the contemplation of God.” This is the state in 
which souls (departed human beings) live in heaven after 
having undergone a gradual process of purification, and await 
reincarnation. 


Forecourts of heaven (pp. 24-25}: Vorhdfe des Himmels. 
This refers to the hierarchy in God’s realms detailed in foot- 
note 19 (p. 39). During the process of purification souls were 
stripped of their wordly memories and identities, and so 
gradually became pure, until finally reunited with the totality 
of all nerves, that is, God. The erstwhile human souls who 
accumulate in the forecourts of heaven are those who have 
become blessed and have some supernatural power but are 
not yet absolutely purified. Above the forecourts of heaven 
were the anterior realms of God, and still higher (and hence 
behind them) the posterior realms of God which were sub- 
ject to a “peculiar dualism,” consisting of Ormuzd and 
Ariman. Schreber was much influenced by the dualism of 
the Persian religion. Both Ariman and Ormuzd are concerned 
with creation in the Persian religion. For Schreber, Ormuzd 
was in favor of his being unmanned (changed into a woman) 
but Ariman had the power of reversing this miracle when 
necessary. 


Basic language (p. 26): Grundsprache. The word Grund is the 
English “ground,” referring to the ground, basis or fundament 
of all things; hence Grundsprache, basic language, for God's 


Ga 
443 
a) 


Notes 


language. It also has the meaning of below, in German as 
well as in English, and is used in this sense in relation to a 
devil as Grundteufel (p. 26). We preferred the word “basic,” 
because it seems to render the meaning in a somewhat more 
current form. 


“Your Majesty's obedient servant” (p. 26): “Ew. Majestdat.” 
This is an untranslatable pun: Ew. being the customary abbre- 
viation for Eure Majestdt. Schreber puns on Ew. as short for 
Ewigkeit, meaning eternity. 


Tested souls (p. 26): geprtifte Seelen. This might have been 
translated as qualified, examined or approved, but we chose 
tested because it renders the punning contained in geprtifte in 
the sense of “severely tested.” Hence the “euphemisms” of the 
basic language by which the meaning of words used to be re- 
versed. Tested souls were those still undergoing the process of 
purification, and hence still impure but already endowed with 
some supernatural power. 


Zoroaster rays (p. 31, footnote 13): Light phenomena play a 
part in the Persian religion; later in the book Schreber refers to 
spectacles of great splendor produced by rays. 


Soul murder (p. 33): This is the most obscure issue in the 
Memoirs and also the most important one. It caused the crisis 
in God's realms, in other words his illness (see Memoirs, Table 
of Contents, Chapter 2). It is mentioned in his “Open letter to 
Professor Flechsig,” where he describes the phenomenon in a 
more abstract sense as any influence or ascendancy one person 
can gain over another, as for instance in hypnosis, or achieve 
some advantage at another person’s expense such as prolonga- 
tion of his own life. In this way the Schrebers may have been 
denied offspring or choice of profession such as that of nerve 


eel 
444 
(eI) 


Notes 


specialist (p. 37): In connection with Schreber’s references 
to soul murder and soul theft, it must be remembered that 
his “philosophy” was based on the dualism of soul and body; 
the soul, the life substance, is part of God and put into a 
human body at conception or birth and drawn up to Him again 
after death. Soul=breath=spirit-nerves=rays=God: it is the 
life substance in circulation. Schreber regarded the soul as 
separate and detachable from the body. When the soul leaves 
the body permanently and returns to God, the person dies; 
illness, particularly nervous illness, is caused when the soul 
leaves the body temporarily, or is under another's influence. 
The theme of soul murder or soul theft is widespread in 
religions and folklore. Schreber refers to the part it plays 
in Goethe's Faust, Weber’s Freischtitz and Byron’s Manfred 
(pp. 31, 33, 34), the theme of which is a mythical contact 
with the beyond, and the meaning and fate of man’s soul, i.e. 


of life. 


The soul of Daniel Fiirchtegott Flechsig vanished years ago 
(flitted away) (p. 35): Die Seele Daniel Ftirchtegott Flechsig ist 
schon seit Jahren verschwunden (hat sich verfhichtigt). 


Contact with divine nerves (p. 35): ein géttlicher Nervenanhang, 
was granted to a person who specialized in nervous illnesses 
(eine Person..., die sich mit Austibung der Nervenheilkunde 
befasste). Asylums for the mentally ill were therefore called 
in the basic language “God’s Nerve Institutes”: Die Heil- 
anstalten fur Geisteskranke hiessen daher in der Grund- 
sprache "Nervenanstalten Gottes.” 


Chapter 3 (p. 43) was deleted from the Memoirs before publica- 
tion; but the Judges of the Appeal Court who had the complete 
Memoirs before them, stated that there was nothing particu- 
larly damaging or offensive in them. 


ie tal 
445 
(ese) 


Notes 


Interferences (p. 47}: Stérungen. these play a large part later in 
the Memoirs. They are explained by Schreber as events caused 
on him or his surroundings in order to interfere with or impede 
the development of soul-voluptuousness in his body, and so 
stop his transformation into a woman. 


Seer of spirits (p. 53): Geisterseher. Schreber explains that a 
seer of spirits is in contact with spirits or blessed souls of de- 
parted human beings (p. 81). 


Nerve-language (p. 54): Nervensprache. This refers to an altered 
awareness of his own thoughts and mental processes, per- 
haps best described as an awareness of unconscious mental 
processes. 


Compulsive thinking (p. 55}: Denkzwang. 


Schreber’s preoccupation with Catholicism and conversion 
(pp. 56-57) may have some basis in the actual situation in 
Saxony, ninety-five percent of the population being Protestant, 
but the Royal House Catholic. 


Corps Saxonia |p. 57): Students’ Club with distinctive colors 
and badges, which encouraged dueling. 


Drinking member (p. 57): Konkneipant. Old member of a Corps 
who is allowed to take part in evenings devoted to drinking 
and revelry. 


Member of a Students’ Union (p. 58): Burschenschaftler. Mem- 
bers of a Students’ Union professing national and liberal prin- 


ciples. 


Unmanning (p. 59): Entmannung. The authorized translation 


446 
| 


Notes 


of Freud (1911) uses the term “emasculation.” We have chosen 
“unmanning” because its primary meaning is “to remove from 
the category of men,” which is what Schreber intended. Only 
its fourth definition in the Oxford English Dictionary is given 
as castration. Emasculation, on the other hand, has castration 
as its primary meaning, i.e. rendering sterile. From the pages 
immediately following, as well as from Schreber’s further text, 
it is quite obvious that he meant transformation by an evolu- 
tionary process into a reproductive woman which was to 
render him fertile. Schreber himself stresses this by usually 
putting “change into a woman” in brackets after the word 
“anmanning.” 

The theme of change of sex is as widespread in early myths 
and religions as it is in psychiatry. The Indo-Germanic deities 
from which the Persian religion derived were bisexual. The 
fundamental story behind all religions, that of sun-gods and 
creators in the sky, shows frequent changes of sex: the earliest 
God was the Great Mother. The sexual, phallic element 
was only added much later to this “heliolithic” complex of 
ideas centering around the origin of life, creation and procre- 
ation (Smith, 1929). In Genesis the first being produced Eve 
from his rib. Schreber believed this original state could occur 
again following world catastrophes, which necessitated cre- 
ation of mankind anew after its destruction. This is “the foun- 
tainhead and parent story” of all myths and religion (Smith, 
1919). The sole survivor procreated single-handed until the 
sexes were established again, and in sufficient numbers to re- 
produce themselves. Hippocrates (quoted by Feuchtersleben, 
1845) relates that the Scythians were subject to a “sacred dis- 
ease,” also described by Herodotus, which caused men to turn 
into women. Schreber states that he suffered from the plague, 
which the souls considered “a disease of nerves and hence a 
‘holy disease’ ” (p. 95). 


Cael 
447 


Notes 


Policy of half measures (" half-heartedness"\|pp. 62-63): Politik 
der Halbheit (" Halbschiirigkeit"). 


Simply “forsaken,” in other words left to rot (p. 63): einfach 
“liegen gelassen,” also wohl der Verwesung anheimgegeben. 


These pages (pp. 63—66) give an interesting insight into suicidal 
attempts on the basis of delusions. They also show the close 
connection between suicidal ideas and suspicions or delusions 
of being killed, which in turn may lead to outbreaks of violent 
behavior, as in Schreber’s case. 


Order of the World (p. 67): Weltordnung. In the authorized 
translation of Freud (1911), this is rendered as “order of things.” 


End of the world (p. 75): Weltuntergang. 
Impure souls (p. 87): unreine Seelen. 


The cursed play-with-human-beings (p. 89): die verfluchte 
Menschenspielerei. 


“Searing” and “blessing” rays (p. 95): “Sehrende” und “Seg- 
nende” Strahlen. 

Concerning the plague, see Note to p. 59, on “sacred 
disease.” 


The idea to “forsake me,” that is to abandon me (p. 96): Die 
Vorstellung mich "liegen zu lassen," d.h. zu verlassen. Schre- 
ber expresses his fear that God might withdraw from him 
before impregnation had occurred, that he would thus be ex- 
cluded from the cycle of life, and his body used “for sexual pur- 
poses only.” 


Notes 


Nerves of voluptuousness (female nerves) (p. 96): Wollust- 
(weibliche) Nerven. Schreber explains that the nerves of 
voluptuousness, also called female nerves, are found all over 
the female body, particularly under the skin of the breasts, 
whereas in the male body only around the genital organ. That, 
as he believed, nerves of voluptuousness were palpable all over 
his own body was evidence for Schreber that his body was be- 
ing transformed into a female body. The development of these 
female nerves of voluptuousness increased his power of attrac- 
tion on divine nerves (rays): therefore the greater the develop- 
ment of voluptuousness in his body, the more ready his body 
to receive and indeed force divine impregnation, which could 
be accomplished by attracting all divine rays. Soul-voluptuous- 
ness, Seelenwollust, is the permanent state of enjoyment in 
which souls exist, which is their permanent expectation of cre- 
ating and being reborn. According to Grimm, the word Wollust 
originally did not contain a deprecatory element, nor was it 
used with reference to sex. Even now it is used independently 
of sex, in its original general sense, as in Wollust des Lebens, 
Wollust der Freiheit (literally, voluptuousness of life, volup- 
tuousness of freedom). See also Note to p. 24. Schreber com- 
bines both senses, as can be seen clearly from pp. 249, 250. 


Nerve of determination (p. 97}: Bestimmungsnerv. 


Wandering clocks (p. 98): Wandeluhren. Schreber’s meaning is 
not clear: Wandel could also mean changing, that is changes in 
the souls of departed heretics contained in these clocks. 


Schreber’s descriptions (pp. 102-107) of his surroundings in 
Pierson’s Asylum (the “Devil's Kitchen”) and his acute obser- 
vation of other patients, throw an interesting light on how 
much patients observe, even when grossly alienated, and how 
much they may be influenced by their surroundings. 


Notes 


With regard to the Determining (p. 106, footnote 54): Rtick- 
sichtlich des Bestimmenden. 


Magazine of rays (p. 112): Strahlenmagazin. 


Moonshine-Blessedness (p. 113): Mondscheinseligkeit, a neo- 
logism referring to the female state of Blessedness, of which 
Schreber says there are two kinds: a flatter and a more ro- 
bust one. The former may be regarded as Child-Blessedness, 
Kinderseligkeit. This also is a neologism and could mean 
both the Blessedness of a child, and the blessed state of being 
with child. As it applies only to the female state of Blessed- 
ness, and as the moon is possibly an allusion to menses, 
it probably indicates a state of being with child. Further 
weight is given to this interpretation by the subsequent associ- 
ations of creating “a new human world (‘new human beings 
out of Schreber’s spirit’).” This is followed (p. 113) by his 
having the soul of the “Apostle (National Saint)” in his 
abdomen. 


National Saint (p. 113): Nationalheiliger, is probably borrowed 
from the Persian religion in which Zoroaster is the national hero 
as well as the prophet. Incidentally, in the Persian religion 
Zoroaster was going to bear a son after three thousand years, 
who was to awaken the dead and create a new and immortal 
world. 


Law for the restoration of the rays (p. 114): Strahlenerneuer- 
ungsgesetz. 


Rascals (p. 118): Hundejungen, literally dogs-chaps; could also 
mean kennel-boy, referring to the souls having to perform 
some menial task as part of purification. (See footnote 56.) 


Notes 
“To remove themselves” (| p. 118): sich wegzusetzen. 


An attempt has been made to keep something of the naive bal- 
lad form of the original (pp. 119-120). The refrain “God's still 
and silent peace” is der stille Gottesfriede. 


Tying-to-rays (p. 122): Anbinden an Strahlen. 
Tying-to-celestial-bodies (p. 122): Anbinden an Erden. 
The writing-down-system (p. 123): das Aufschreibesystem. 


“Miss Schreber” (p. 124) may be a pun and mean “miss 
Schreber,” which in German as in English means to omit. 
Schreber might be implying that he was missed out from hav- 
ing offspring. It can also mean in English as in German “bad or 
wrong” as in misshapen, i.e. a freak. 


The notion of “representing” (p. 124, footnote 62): der Begriff 
des "Darstellens.” 


At every “sight” (twinkle of an eye) (p. 124, footnote 62): in je- 
dem "Gesichte” |Augenblicke). This phrase recurs repeatedly 
and is a pun: Gesicht, meaning both sight, that which is seen, 
and face. Augenblick, literally glance of the eyes, also means 
moment, momentary, immediately or now. 


“We have already got this,” scilicet written-down (p. 128): 
"Das haben wir schon" (gesprochen; “Hammirschon") scilicet 
aufgschrieben. We have omitted the words in brackets (spo- 
ken: “Hammirschon") because they merely represent the 
sound of the words when they are spoken rapidly. 


Learnt by rote (p. 132, footnote 64): auswendig gelernt. 


r 
451 


Notes 


The “cursed creation-of-a-false-feeling” (p. 137): die “ver- 
fluchte Stimmungsmache.” 


The mood-falsifying-miracle (p. 138): das Stimmungsfdlschungs- 
wunder. 


The compression-of-the-chest-miracle (p. 143): Engbriistigkeits- 
wunder. 


Schreber here (p. 144, footnote 69) explains his reasons for re- 
fusing food; Dr. Weber in his report stated that for a long time 
Schreber also refused meat altogether (p. 329). 


Dangerous obstruction of my gut (p. 145, footnote 72): Darm- 
verschlingung. 


Soul-conception (p. 154): Seelenauffassung, the soul's way of 
looking at things. 


The not-thinking-of-anything-thought (p. 158): der Nichts- 
denkungsgedanke. 


I did not encourage the miracle ("pacify it” was the expression 
in the basic language) (pp. 159-160): dass ich das Wunder nicht 
begtinstigt habe |"begtitigt habe," wie der grundsprachlich 
Ausdruck lautete). The clang association of the original can- 
not be rendered in English. 


Spirited woman (p. 165): Geistreiches Weib. Literally: a woman 
full of spirits. 


So-what-party ( p. 178): Je nun Partei. 


Schreber mentions that he had to shave off his mustache 


Lr cpa 
452 
Ca St 


Notes 


(p. 180); this was the first outward sign of transvestitism 
(August 1896). 


Many in One or Onein Many (p. 181, footnote 83): Vielheit in 
der Einheit oder Einheit in der Vielheit. 


The bellowing-miracle (p. 188): das Briillwunder. 


Similarity of sounds (p. 192): Gleichklang der Laute. Schreber 
describes the alliteration, “clang association,” and hence pun- 
ning so frequently found in schizophrenics. 


Schreber describes the common phenomenon of obsessional 
rumination (p. 207 ff.). These pages seem to confirm Freud’s 
observation that in the last analysis all obsessive questioning 
and doubting originate from the first question “Where do I 
come from.” As Schreber puts it naively “Between divine 
creation...and the individual processes of life there are innu- 
merable intermediate links which are eminently interesting to 
work out” (p. 208). 


To picture (p. 210): Zeichnen; also to draw. 


Spontaneous generation (p. 217): Urzeugung. This he exempli- 
fies on insects (p. 218). 


Schreber makes clear that his being in contact with, and wish- 
ing to attract all rays expresses his hope for offspring (pp. 227- 
228). He says “the capacity to transform themselves into 
animals of all kinds, ultimately even into a human being, is 
the latent potential of divine rays; they can create these 
creatures out of themselves”; and on p. 224: “the ‘frightening- 
miracles’ are perhaps to be regarded as the very first beginnings 
of divine creation, which in certain circumstances could be 


Notes 


further condensed to ‘fleeting-improvised-men’ and from there 
lead up to the creation of real human beings or other perma- 
nent beings. ” 


An extremely interesting description of ideas of reference 
(p. 233 ff.). 


Note that Schreber does not identify with Jesus Christ as Freud 
thought, but only compares the magnitude of his sufferings 
with the martyrdom of Christ (pp. 257-258). 


The automatic-remembering-thought (p. 272): der unwillktir- 
liche Erinnerungsgedanke. 


Essentially without thought (p. 283): die Hauptgedanken- 
losigkeit. 


FOOTNOTES 

There are no footnotes 17 and 18. 

Footnotes 24 and 91 were not printed because they referred to 
Flechsig (pp. 294, 382-83). 

Footnote 28 is missing. Schreber refers to it on pp. 73, 74, and 
80. It was not printed because it contained a reference to the 
reigning King (p. 73). 

There are two footnotes 74. 

There are footnotes 93 and 93B, but no footnote 94. 

There is no footnote 102. 


LEGAL TERMS 

Str.G.B. Strafgesetzbuch: Criminal Code. 

C.P.O. Civil-Prozess-Ordnung: Code of Civil Procedure. 
B.-G.-B. Btirgerliches Gesetzbuch: Common Law Code. 
Str.-Pr.-O. Straf-Prozess-Ordnung: Code of Criminal Procedure. 


eee: 
454 
cal 


Notes 


G.u.V.Bl. Gesetz und Verordnungsblatt: Gazette in which new 
laws and orders are published. 

Amtsgericht: District Court. 

Landesgericht: Country Court. 

Oberlandesgericht: Superior Country Court (Court of Appeal). 


0.gif ¬